"Oh, sons, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, to fulfill its end and because of its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which deals with surgery by hand."
For surgery by hand has become completely private in our region and time, so that few people know about this science, and its traces are obscured; there would remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed hands and been lost due to error and confusion, such that their intentions are closed off and its strength is diminished.
And it seems to me that I should revive this with an orderly arrangement of this treatise according to the ways of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and that I should include representations of the forms of cautery instruments and other tools used in the work, both as additions to the explanation and preparation for its use, which is necessary.
But the reason why there is not a good craftsman with his hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well so that he might know the arrangement of the limbs and their forms, conjunctions, separations, knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, their numbers, arrangement, pulse veins and tranquil ones, and the locations of their outlets.
And therefore says Hippocrates that with a small work, but more in the art of the hand.
But we have already said about that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error, causing many deaths, as I have seen too often, because some are formed in this science but depart from it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incision an escrofulous boil on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die suddenly.
And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from the bladder of a man who was in that condition, and the stone was large; he came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day.
And I already knew that it would be impossible to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the illness, I knew beforehand that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a salary of one ducat from our land for surgery, and he undertook to treat a blacksmith who had a fracture in his hip; with great ignorance, the doctor prepared himself, removed the fracture above the wound with pillows and splints with strong tension, not allowing any space for breathing.
And he bound it according to his desires, and applied ligatures, and then released them after some days, commanding that the bandages be loosened. And so it was until the hip and thigh became gangrenous, resulting in loss of limb.
And I was called to him, and I prepared myself to untie the ligatures, and thus peace and ease were obtained, and his pains diminished.
But nevertheless the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not prevent it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger of losing his life.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous boil, and it became ulcerated after several days, causing the illness to worsen for the patient.
The reason is that the cancerous boil is caused by black bile, therefore it should not be burned with iron of any kind, but rather cauterized on the member that suffers from it.
And therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one part is the operation associated with health, and the other part is the work in which there is danger in the most severe dispositions.
And I have already mentioned this in all parts of this book where there is discussion about operations involving error and fear. Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that foolish people do not find an opportunity to speak ill of you and bring dishonor upon you.
Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and approach illnesses with confidence and steadfastness.
Therefore, use the best way through the grace of God to preserve health and achieve successful outcomes, leave difficult illnesses with terrible prognosis alone, show your weapons against that which makes you afraid, so that your faith and trust in yourself and your name may not abandon you. For it is more pleasing to your glory, both here on earth and hereafter, in your sanctity.
For as I have already said in some of my treatises: "Don't treat incurable illnesses, lest you become known as a bad doctor."
And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. Chapter 1, arranged within these sections: on weights, forms of instruments and irons for cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. Chapter 2, concerning cautery and perforation, cupping vessels, plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar items, arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter 3, concerning reduction and dislocation, and the treatment of torticollis and similar conditions; arranged according to weights and forms of instruments.
It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of those who are benefited by this cautery and those harmed by it, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discussion on the qualities of those benefited by cautery and harmed by it is long and verbose, subtle in science, and secretly hidden. Many wise men have spoken about it, but they disagree among themselves, and it suffices for me to mention a little of their sermons due to lengthiness.
And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial for every universal condition, whether it has matter or not, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the cauda without matter.
"The tail-like and dry complexion with matter out of harmony; for some said that cautery is beneficial to this one, but others said the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in an illness which is due to quality and dryness, because nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inconvenient for a dry and hot disease like this to be treated with something hot and dry."
"Yet he who said the opposite argues that cautery brings benefit to all hot and dry diseases found in human bodies, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, it finds them similar."
"And I say that this has been experienced by me many times in practice."
"But it is not necessary to come back to this subject which has already been extensively discussed in the chapter on cautery, and which has been well known for a long time. Everyone knows the diversity of human temperaments and the dispositions of illnesses that occur in them, as well as their causes and accidents, and the duration of those conditions."
"But in other complexions, there is less concern, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, since all physicians are agreed about these matters and do not disagree on the use of cautery in treating them."
"And know, my son, that the secret of treating by cautery with fire and its benefits lies in cautery being a medicine that burns. For fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized, and it does not harm any other adjacent member unless with little damage."
"But the action of a burning medicine reaches that which is nearby in the members, and often it brings illness to those members which are difficult to heal, and also often it removes them."
"But fire, because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except to purge excesses. And we have known this for a long time through experiment and the length of service in studying the art, regarding the truth of causes; therefore I am excused from speaking at length on this subject. If it were not forbidden to mention this secret in my book at this point, I would reveal it to you with philosophical demonstration, which would sharpen your understanding."
"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by time's accidents is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn out by cautery. And even more so if cautery is performed for pains or necessary purposes, such as those that cannot tolerate delay because of fear of worse malice coming about, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
"And know this not in your hearts, my son, for only the common people and foolish physicians estimate this, namely that the illness which is healed by cautery has a relapse at all times, and they consider it to be a consequence of that."
"And the cause is not at all as they suppose, for cautery is nothing but a medicine that alters complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause of pains."
"But indeed, cautery exceeds medicine in its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lordship."
"But it is possible that the illness will return at some time, according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the illness, and the virtue of cautery, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of excesses therein, and what has been acquired by it through food and similar causes; nevertheless, the illness in which cautery is administered will be subtle, in a member with few superfluities and humors, as for example cautery of teeth for pain and similar ones, it is possible that that pain will not return, but this happens rarely."
"And moreover, the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is quite true, for they believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause before cautery."
"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine means only when the methods of cure are administered in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, then cautery is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits there." "And from here on it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and most foolish physicians understand."
"And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and demonstrated that this is not so except in some bodies without others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; nevertheless, when you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not clear to you, for it depends on the quantity you want because of the heat of the gold, and prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust it over ignition, the gold will melt in the fire, and some sheets may fall into the fire so that the artist may catch them by chance."
"And for this reason cautery with iron is done more gently and more precisely to the uprightness of operation."
"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and those of the head within the weights, so that later you may ask for what you want from it."
"The first chapter."
"This cautery counteracts humidity and coldness from the common accident which these two causes are due to, namely an abundance of nasal flux called catarrh flowing from the head into the parts of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and pain in teeth and in the throat, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, gout, and apoplexy, etc. in those illnesses."
"The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the sick person to be evacuated with laxative medicine purging the head for three or four nights, according to what you require from the virtue of the illness and the age and habit of the patient."
"And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then perform the cautery between your hands over a cushioned bench, and have him place his hands on his chest."
"And then place the palm of your hand close to the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows." "But nevertheless, when your little finger has reached the middle spot, mark that spot with ink, and then light the olive oil cautery of which this is the form:"
"And then place it on the spot marked with ink in such a way that it descends gradually while your hand is constrained little by little, and you turn it."
"And then raise your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any of the bone already exposed on the head, like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it is not yet hot enough with that iron, use another one until you see what I have said to you."
"And next, take some salt and dissolve it on that spot, leaving it there for three days."
"And then pause over the wound's edge and leave it there until the burn scar is destroyed." "And next, cleanse the wound with Tetrafarmacon cream until it heals."
"They also said that when the plague is opened, it's better to tie the arm, for it is more beneficial and healing."
"And some of them said that the sinew should be cauterized up to the bone, and the cautery should be kept there until some part of the bone's spirit is absorbed."
"And next, scrape off what has adhered to the bone, and then it should be healed."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches its end, it should be pressed forcefully onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of a small cauterization:" "And they believe that from that spot the fumes of the head expire."
"And the opened plague should be kept for a long time, and next it should be healed until it is consolidated."
"But I have not seen this kind of cautery used on the head at all, except in some cases due to fear; and therefore, it seems better for health's sake to me to leave it alone, when there is an opening. For the head is weakened by a solution of continuity from such things, as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally frail."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion. And from that hole and with that procedure, it is healthier."
"Chapter Two:"
"On cauterizing the head."
"When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head and this is due to prolonged illness, and various treatments are used such as ointments, poultices, plasters, and bandages, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not relieve the pain for any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is naturally strong in its creation; if it is not frail or very thin-skinned, then cauterize again with another cautery a little further away from the previous one." "And next, cauterize that over the horn of his head with a cautery until the cord is severed." "Cut the cord and expose the bone to the amount we have mentioned, and cauterize it with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'the vein', which is the location where a cupping glass is placed." "And be gentle in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient suffers great pain from this beyond all other head cauteries."
"And I tell you this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to use the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occupit are cauterized more subtly than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized. And this is its form."
"Chapter Three:"
"On cauterizing for non-antiquated migraine."
"When sudden pain occurs in the part of the head or a severe headache is felt within it, let it be evacuated with medicines that clarify the head. And if the other treatment, which I have described earlier for these illnesses, does not help, then cauterization should be performed in one of two ways: either cauterization with an acutely burning medicine, or with iron."
"The better cautery with a burning medicine is this: take a bunch of mallow, dry it, and cut off both its heads." "And next, incise the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is at the same level as the cord and is hidden."
"And next, press down on it with steady pressure using a tight bandage and leave it there for the space of three hours. And next, remove the bandage and pull out the mallow, leaving the wound open for two or three days. And next, compress the sunken area around the edge so that the wound becomes hard."
"And next, dress it with a salve until it is healed."
"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
"The better cauterization with iron is done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape:"
"And it is called 'closed nails', for the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in the middle."
"And next, place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand steady so that the heat does not adhere to the arc of the cautery, and slowly turn the hot iron little by little with speed."
"And if the quantity of it that adheres to the heat of the cord is as much as its majority, then lift your hand up so that the artery nearby does not adhere, lest there be a flow of blood."
"And next, moisten the wound with salt water and place it on the location, leaving it there for three days. And next, compress the wound with a bandage around the edge, and dress it with a salve until it is healed."
"And if you wish, cauterize the extreme part of the temporal bone with a cautery according to this method, and be careful not to incise the artery in this migraine specifically."
"Chapter Four:"
"On cauterizing for antiquated migraine."
"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the sections on illnesses, but the treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to heat a cautery for cutting bone until it becomes white. And next, press down on the location of the pain with a line of the length of which the majority is indicated or guessed at. And keep your hand there for one moment and press down firmly until you incise the artery and enter into the bone."
"But it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the continuity of the mandible, which is moved during mastication. And that the nerve is not adhered to or that the muscles that move it are not spasmed."
"And if it is about the caution and carefulness of the flow of blood from the artery that is opened up, for there is fear in its opening, especially for one who does not know what they are doing or is not studious and experienced. And leave the operation to one who begins."
"And I bring with remembrance the regimen of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner in its proper place in this book."
"And if you see this illness not responding to this cautery and that the patient's body can tolerate it, then cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have related, and dress the wound until it is healed."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on constriction of an artery with a cautery having two points, for this is better cauterization and more conforming."
"Chapter Five:"
"On cauterizing ear pain."
"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that I have mentioned in the section, but the pain is not removed, then heat this cautery, which is called punctum and has this shape:"
"And bring the puncture to the ignition and guide it around the entire ear like a wheel turned, or in the circumference of each side if the pain is on one side." Slowly heat with the cautery of the root of the ear's hair little by little until you have sensitized the area with touch.
If the cautery causes pain in all the points around the ear, then stop and carefully examine the area to ensure it is healed.
Chapter vi.
On cauterizing the throat.
The type of sore throat that is treated with cautery is only that which arises from blood, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for types of sore throat caused by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of torticollis with herbs and capperugs and gargarisms, but your treatment does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of both lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the part that seems healthy.
And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize there with the cautery in the right part of the ear tip above a little on the horn of the head, and on the temple another, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb, and pause your hand with cautery until its quantity burns enough of the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of the cautery, which belongs to the barber-surgeon, whose form is as follows: However, it is even more subtle than what you can see; and sometimes it happens that instead of too much roughness, it cuts through excessiveness.
And then treat the area with whatever remedy is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter VII
Concerning the cauterization of ancient apoplexy
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not confer and the patient has no fever, then cauterize there with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said; and with cautery on the cheek. And the manner of cautery is made according to what has been said above.
And also cauterize over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more rearward; and then treat it with whatever remedy you see fit.
Chapter VIII
Concerning cautery for oblivion caused by a blow
If the patient has been given great jars at the beginning, and purifying pills to be served.
"Then carefully shave the head of the patient and place on the crown the plaster described in the treatise of plasters."
"And apply it several times, for this is the manner of cauterization." "Then do this according to that order which I have already stated."
"And if he is healed with these treatments; and if not, then make him three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck." "And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and immediately dress the wound with what has been prepared."
"But if you wish to add and the patient is tolerating it well, then make the cautery in the middle of the wound; but if you wish to increase the addition, then cauterize over the two horns."
"Dress that which has been healed immediately; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given above."
"Chapter ix."
"Of cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body."
"Therefore, if you proceed in the softening of the head with irises and with what has been said; and immediately shave the head of the patient, and immediately cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with cauteries over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the last part of it, and with three cauteries over the cervical vertebrae."
"And if it is necessary in the softening of the body that is too great and the patients are tolerating it well and the disease is strong, then immediately cauterize that with four cauteries over the dorsal vertebrae, and descendingly with a cautery towards where the backbone ends, and raise the right hand." "And immediately dress that which has been healed, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery."
"Chapter x."
"Of cauterization of epilepsy."
"The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm."
"It is therefore necessary to cleanse the patient's brain at the beginning of the treatment, and with another method which we have mentioned earlier in this division, when the illness is severe and the exception of medicines."
"If it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and chewing mixtures to cleanse the throat, for several days beforehand, with proper diet."
"And properly shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding manner, and another cautery on the occupit, and cauterize each temple separately." "And if the illness is strong and tolerable, then cauterize it with the aforementioned cauteries, having previously performed paralysis and moistening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back."
"And let there be a cautery made of olive oil according to what is precedent."
"But if the illness is in childhood, then perform cauterization with subtle cauteries in this manner."
"Chapter XI."
"Of Cauterization for Melancholy."
"When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the aforementioned cauteries after performing paralysis."
"And if the cause of melancholy is an abundance that declines towards melancholy and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink what cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned in the division."
"And properly shave the head of the patient, and properly make a turtledove suitably prepared for him on his crown, and properly place it in the middle of the head."
"And let the patient be lying down, and let him be held down from every part."
"And properly apply a liniment; then it is fitting to bind with wool from sheep." "And warm that on the fire for gentle warming by measure, which he suffers when it is placed on him." "And then remove that from the middle of his head within the circle, and let him be covered so that he is not chilled."
"And do this with the patient once a week, with the other regimen being to rub him with the boiling water so that he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it with small points according to his strength, but keep your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is the special cautery which moistens the brain evenly."
"And then apply that poultice wrapped in bandages or in down of wool."
"Chapter XII."
"Of Cauterization for Descending Water in the Womb."
"When it is declared to you that water has begun to descend into the womb by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and let the patient drink what cleanses his head, and guard him from all humidity."
"And make him sit in a warm bath for several days."
"And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head; and also cauterize him with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water into both wombs, or on one side if it is the beginning of the descent of water into one womb."
"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are near the neck, and let the cauteries be placed there at that distance in the latitude of the temples."
"And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when he is cauterized. And if you see any flux of blood, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal."
"And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those, and with care for fluxes of blood."
"And sometimes it is cauterized in the nape of the neck near two bones with two cauteries applied firmly."
"Chapter XIII."
"Regarding the cautery of old tears."
"When tears of the eyes are abundant and flow through veins and arteries that are visibly manifest on the face, it is verified that this is a superfluous fluid; therefore cauterize with a cautery as described at the beginning regarding how to make water boil in the eye, using cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on either side of the temples, and two cauteries on either side of the jawbones." "And if you need an addition, cauterize also on both sides of the cheekbone at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
"Chapter XIV."
"The cautery for removing bad odor from the nose."
"When you treat him with what we have said in the division and it does not help, then prepare and give him to drink decoctions for three nights; and after shaving his head, cauterize him with a hot cautery mixed with olive oil." "And also cauterize him with a cautery made of cloves along with two cauteries placed above the eyebrows on either side of the hair, a little."
"But be careful that you do not burn him."
"And this is how the clove cautery is made:"
"Chapter XV."
Cauterization for softening of eyelid swelling.
When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with a cautery using this cautery made of moonlight iron; and this is how it is done:
If you are cauterizing both eyebrows together, use two cauteries in total, spaced apart, and elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow hair present.
Do not press too hard with the cautery, but rather according to how much of the third section of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI
Of cauterizing the eyelid when the hair becomes inflamed and pierces the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid become inflamed and pierce the eye, cauterize them in one of two ways: either with a cautery or with medicine that burns.
If cauterizing with fire, order the patient to pluck out their hairs like those which are plucked for purification, until they are extended and removed; and if any remain at their roots, then stretch the eyelids with a cloth so that they are not harmed until the hairs have grown out.
Then, when the hairs have grown out and become elongated, place the patient's head on a high pillow, and then draw near to the eyelid of the eye with a tent, shaped like a Mercury's feather, whose beginning should be close to the hairs.
And then place cotton soaked in alum or in pigeon dung mucus on the eye.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:
Approach the figure which you have marked, little by little, with many glances, until the surface of the skin, which appears like a myrtle leaf, is completely consumed.
A sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and its hairs rise up from the puncture of the eye.
Then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and appropriately pause on that spot with a border until the scar is healed. And properly dress it with ointment until it heals
But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid is softened again, then perform the cauterization on that spot once more just as you had done initially.
But if the hairs are on the eyelid itself, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and covered up so that the hairs do not fall into the eye.
But if you use burning medicine for the cauterization, then command the patient to let the hairs grow out and be covered up, and appropriately make a bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth.
And also take some known soap and live colophony and knead them together with a little water, and quickly mix those ingredients well, and make this mixture with haste so that it does not become cooled; and spread this over the bandage which was made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; and wrap the eye area with an egg white cloth, and have the patient lie down on their back.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without hurting until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for its bite is like that of fire.
And when it is perceived that the burning sensation has begun, then remove the medicine and wipe it gently with your finger; but when the burning sensation stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. And then examine whether the eyelid is raised as it should be after being washed. If not, then put back on the medicine over the place where it had not adhered, until it becomes covered up completely, so that your operation is finished and the eye is contracted.
And also place over it a border until the inflammation of the adhesion is eliminated, and then treat it with ointment or another appropriate remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, after your operation, to guard with vigilant care that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes inflamed within several days and some hairs start falling into the eye, then repeat the application of the medicine on that place where the eyelid is inflamed, just as you did at the beginning. And also cover it until it is healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
The hues of men are differentiated according to their magnitude and smallness, therefore your traction is made accordingly.
And the path of rectitude shall not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lachrymal bone of the skull.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on their knees, and have one of your assistants hold their head between their hands so that it is neither moved nor shaken by their own head.
Then carefully apply a hot cautery to the bone or a moxa of pitch on the spot where the fistula is located.
And the form of the cautery that we are describing is this:
The body that is hollow, such as in shape of a reed or a raven's feather, from one end at which the cautery was made.
And if you wish, it may penetrate into the other extremity. If you want, then do so as if testing.
However, the hollow one is better for this task.
And appropriate pressure should be applied to the fistula if it's open, then dry and clean that area. But if it is not open, work on it until it opens and draw out the pus from there.
And then pause on it with the cautery that has been properly ignited, and place your hand near there but a little way down towards the beginning of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or cause unnecessary discomfort. Then immediately pause the cautery in the groove of the nostril and burn away any corruption there.
And then if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as necessary; and leave that area alone for three days, and afterwards apply pressure to that spot with a border and surrounding it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to that area until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is convenient in its chapter.
And another method of cauterizing a fistula that some previously described is: enter the location of the fistula and burn it and immediately pause on that fissure with a thin camel's hair brush of which this is the shape. Then pour into that the quantity of one inch of molten lead, and hold your hand near there with good retention, so that the molten lead does not get into the wound; and cover that area of the wound with egg albumen or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with that which we have spoken of regarding cautery and cure, that is good. But if not, then it will be necessary to administer a trepanation of the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what comes in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII
Of cauterizing the split of the buttocks
Many times splits occur in the labia majora, but especially in the labia minora of children.
Therefore when you cure those splits with what we have said in the sections and it is not beneficial, then apply a small cautery knife according to this shape that is shown:
And let its concavity be according to the thinness of a needle.
Apply that iron carefully into those splits until the cautery reaches the bottom of the splits.
And then cure it with cerottum until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth
When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or around the roots of teeth and it bursts, and later becomes hardened, and pus comes out and a fistula is made, and if you cure that and it is not beneficial, then you should apply cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula. Then insert that burning iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then cure it with what we have said about curing until it is healed.
And then if the healing is separated and healed, that is good. But if not, then it will be necessary to uncover the location and remove the decayed bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter XX
"Burning of teeth and softening of ulcers."
"When ulcers are softened by moisture and teeth are made mute, and you treat them with medicines without conferring, then place the patient's head on your thigh, and quickly bring the cautery in this form: thus you will hold the forceps over the tooth and insert it therein the ignited cautery swiftly, but keep your hand somewhat withdrawn so that the patient may feel the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth."
"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you desire."
"And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, because the mute tooth is fixed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried."
"Chapter XXI."
"On the cauterization of tooth pain."
"When tooth pain is due to coldness or wormwood or when medicine does not help, then cauterize in that place in two ways: either with the border of a cow's horn, or with fire."
"Cauterizing with the border (of a cow's horn) means that you take the border of a cow's horn and heat it in the coals of fire, then take some cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the cautery, and quickly apply that heated border to the painful tooth until it is warmed."
"And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth."
"And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the aforementioned border and place it on the painful tooth, then place hot iron on top until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth."
"But nevertheless, the cautery with fire means that you wait for the coal of iron or of fire to be red-hot, and is done in such a way that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient."
"And then light the cautery of whatever shape you desire, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand close until the cautery is cooled down. And do this several times in one day or over a few days until the pain disappears."
"And it is necessary that after this cautery, the patient holds their mouth open on one side and keeps it closed for an hour, then spits it out. And this is the form of the cautery."
"And cauterize with whichever extreme you wish according to what is possible for you."
"And this is the form of the cautery:"
"Chapter XXII."
"On cauterization of external piles."
When external swellings are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and they are not obedient to digestion through medicines and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cautery with this shape, having two pointed extremities so that smoke may exit from one side of the cautery, and place that fire on that boil once, and if needed again, until it reaches the head of the boil.
And if the boil is small, then you apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying it on the surrounding skin until what was burned by the fire is removed.
Then dress that wound with ointments and bandages until it heals
Chapter XXIII
Of cauterizing quinsy of the throat and of strangury.
"When humidity affects the chest, especially if it is accompanied by coldness, then the patient should first be treated with purgative medicines, and also cauterize that area on the left side."
"And make sure not to touch the testicles with the cautery iron, nor burn the cord attached to them."
"Cauterize there also with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it." "And the cautery should be done thus, following the previous manner."
"And also treat that with what has been mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter XXIV."
"Of the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough."
"When cough and lung disease are due to humid coldness, and the illness has no fever or spitting, and is an old disease, then cauterize with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed places of the lungs and windpipe; and also cauterie one at the middle place of the breast between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done thus according to the preceding form."
"And if you wish, let your cautery be done with the cautery called puncture, whose form has been described in the section on ear pain."
"Let there be punctures made thus upon those places; and also treat that with what has been mentioned until it is healed."
"And if the cautery is having three branches, then you can make three cauteries according to this form:"
"Chapter XXV."
"Of the cautery treatment for tickling which is the head of the humoral disorder."
"When the head of the humor is displaced due to slippery humidity and does not return at its usual time, you should reduce the displacement so that it returns to its usual course. And when it is displaced thus, as we have testified, then first reduce the displacement, and let the illness be reversed onto its two sides or onto the opposite side; and also raise the neck which is at the lower part of the tickling up to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is displaced downward."
"And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:"
"And then cauterize the neck until it penetrates that side, and comes out on the other side. And here is the figure of cautery with four cauteries."
"And sometimes it fits thus, and therefore there are eight cauteries."
"And then pause upon the cautery for three days with salt; and let the illness adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for any time until it is consoled."
"And if the displacement is toward the upper parts and it happens thus, then cauterize upon the muscle with a pointed cautery or with several punctiform cauteries, for the junction is confirmed and the humidity is broken up, and the illness is healed."
"Chapter XXVI."
"Of the cautery treatment of the stomach."
"When there is pain and much humidity in the stomach such that it increases greatly its size, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment without improvement, then let the illness be reversed onto its two sides and extended its breasts and its ribs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one on the left side of the pit of the stomach according to the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two on either side of the two lower parts of the cautery until you get the triangular figure; and elongate those that are not fitting so that they make purification."
"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the neck."
"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form with addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and this is one cautery according to the circular form thus:"
"And let the stomach be punctured according to that which frightens from this cautery: and you should strike upon the stomach with a tentacle according to the quantity that you wish, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that is previously described until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"Of the cautery treatment of the fatty liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence such that it is thrown from its usual size by superfluous exit and if the illness is treated with what we have said without improvement, then let the illness be reversed onto its upper part, and strike with a tentacle three cauteries according to this form and this measure on the liver on the left side of the hypochondria where the decubitus of man lies."
"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right hand."
"and do not press too much with the cautery."
"And if the quantity of that which adheres is equal to the thickness of the spearhead of the neck, and it is not fitting there; and if the illness stands on its feet; and if not standing, then let him sit down, who has already extended his thighs, and raise his arms."
"And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
"And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cautery, and let the spearhead of the entire neck adhere so that all the body may adhere and enter into the vessels, for the neck is subtle here; know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
Perforation of an abscess on the liver using a cautery.
If you ever notice an abscess on the liver and want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its capsule, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will become very ill and their pain will be acute.
And if it is on the capsule of the liver, then the pain is intense and sometimes even baffles physicians in treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned onto their stomach. The location of the abscess should be felt with the fingertips and then, appropriately heated cautery resembling an arrowhead, the form of which was previously described, is applied to it. And cauterize with that cautery until all the chain (of inflammation) is consumed, until it reaches the diaphragm, until there is nothing left to burn.
And then treat it with the usual treatment for other abscesses until it heals.
Only those who have studied medicine and are experienced in various illnesses should use this cautery method. But even they should approach this operation with caution.
Capítulo XXIX
Of the cauterization of pleurisy
The ancient cauteries for pleurisy were made in this manner: Take a long, dry stick from the juniper plant and make it into a probe as thick as your finger.
Then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery at the point where the continuity of the collarbone meets the neck; and with two small cauteries diagonally, one a little below the jaw on the left side; and with two cauteries declining between the fifth rib and the seventh rib, inclining a little towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another above the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest.
And do not hold the cautery with your hand, but let it be in plain view of the neck while working.
And the ancients said that some men use cauteries of iron similar to a ray, and they heated it in the fire and put it between the ribs until it reached the abscess and burned it out, as we have said regarding the liver abscess.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for if it happens immediately at the location of the fistula where there is no healing.
Chapter 30
Of cauterization of the uvula
When you treat the disease of the uvula with what we have said about its cure and division and it does not improve, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are appropriate. The first way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the uvula according to the figure of the liver cauteries, whose shape has been previously described.
And let each cautery be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of cauterization should be as we have described for liver cauteries.
And do not hold the cautery with your hand; and let the disease be evident on both sides of its location.
And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery without two points, which causes we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the neck which is towards the uvula where the location of the disease is situated on the left side.
And let your elevation be such that when you elevate the neck it should follow the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
And then carefully insert the two points while hot into it, until they penetrate on the other side of the neck.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three points.
And then treat the cautery because it has left behind much matter to throw out for too many days, for it is more beneficial than other causes that we have previously mentioned in treatment.
Chapter 31
"On cauterization of dropsy."
"No cautery is applied to dropsy except in certain instances specifically."
"When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in this section and your treatment does not take effect, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the shoulder blades of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach." "The depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin."
"And remove the cautery promptly so that it does not scar for too long."
"And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery with anything that might cause two intentions to be added together; instead, let it be hastened with the help of healing remedies."
"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a key according to its preceding form; and that with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive according to its preceding form."
"Chapter xxxii."
"On cauterization of feet and thighs."
When the feet are swollen from dropsy and filled with serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the heel near where the ear lobe meets the ring finger, lifting your hand up while cauterizing so as not to turn that; then lift your hand up again, but do not return too quickly for fear of causing a relapse.
Here is how the cautery should be performed: Place two cauteries on each thigh and make a cautery on each thigh with the cutting edge of the cautery. And the cauteries should be made along the length of the thigh, one below the hip joint and the other below the middle of the thigh; two cauteries on each thigh.
And let the ulcer remain uncovered for a long time to prevent any water from accumulating in it.
Then treat him with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter 33
On the cautery of a swollen belly.
When the body's stomach is heated and humidified by excessive humors that weaken its strength, it is the digestive and retentive virtue residing in the stomach and intestines. This is treated with medical practices without conferring, sometimes causing patients to exhibit cauterization of virtue, thus cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in gastric cauterization, using a circular cautery and four subtle needle-like cauteries around the navel, and another cautery on the large bladder or two cauteries.
And if excessive humidity exists and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize them on the navel and intestines, placing two cauteries firmly on the stomach near the groin for a perfect cure without error.
Capitol XXXIV
Of the Cautery Treatment of Hemorrhoids
When there are large, hard hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupt humidities that are not cured by the methods mentioned earlier and do not confer with their treatment, then cauterize them using three cauteries on each side of the buttocks near the small triangular ones, and another cautery above the navel halfway down.
And if it appears that the stomach is cold and its food is not digested, and sometimes the face is bloated, then cauterize the person on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and apply another cautery to the liver, and yet another cautery to the spleen using a needle-like cautery, leaving it in place for some time until the interior is healed.
Capitol XXXV:
Of cauterization of hemorrhoids followed by their excision.
When you excise the piles, immediately apply the cautery that is attached to your hand Then place the glowing ember of the cauterizing iron on that excised pile and seal its end before blood flows from the vein it was attached to.
And if there are more piles, cauterize each one in turn as described above, and then treat them with this ointment until they heal.
But if you cauterize with a large cautery over too much area, it is more likely to cause harm.
Chapter XXXVI
Regarding the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally located in the skin
When nature does not obey the treatment recommended for it, and the patient becomes anxious about this, apply cautery to heal it.
Therefore, when there is some fistula formed in nature and it is old, with corrupt matter and moisture inside it, first cleanse it carefully with a thin probe and then determine the depth of it using the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery which resembles a needle And then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, as deep as the probe entered it.
Repeat this process with the cautery until all of those corrupt tissues are burned away, once or twice or three times according to your needs.
And be careful not to burn any nerves or veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestine, then be especially careful in those areas. Do this only when the fistula is located in fatty tissue and you believe it is not penetrating deeply.
Then dress the wound until it heals.
And if the opening is sealed and all the matter has been removed from it, but after some time it remains closed in this way, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter is not completely removed from it, then know that either the fistula is penetrating deeply or there is some corruption in front of its opening. There will be a reminder of this elsewhere in its section.
Chapter XXXVII
Regarding cautery for boils
When boils cause pain on touch or become very swollen and the person's condition worsens because of this, then cauterize them over each boil with a hot needle cautery, as described in its section.
Heat the cautery well and then apply it gently over each boil, so that three cauteries leave their marks there, and thus they will be more effectively burned.
Chapter XXXVIII
Regarding cautery for the bladder
When there is weakening and softening in the bladder due to friction and moisture, so that the person cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on its most painful side near the pubic hair area, using one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
Let the length of each cautery be according to the number of fingers below the pubic hair. Cauterize it also on the most painful side lower down on the back, using one or two cauteries as needed.
And let the cautery be a pointed needle, as described earlier.
Chapter XXXIX
"Regarding cauterization of the greater."
"If there is heat and moisture in the womb, and because of this conception is prohibited, and her menstrual periods are corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and there occurs pain during their discharge, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel area, as we have described for the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery below the back or two cauteries, and let the cautery be sharp."
Chapter XL
"Regarding cauterization for dislocation of the anus."
"When moist humors are emitted at the opening of the anus, and there are such causes for the displacement of its place, and a sign of it is that one thing appears prolonged over another when they are compared between them." "And the location of the dislocation is found in the bottom of the gut."
"Therefore you should cauterize the illness at the opening of the anus with a circular cautery, since you will have marked out its circumference with your finger as it is revolved, and thus that the opening falls into the middle of the circle."
"And let the cautery be of the same shape as that previously described for cauterizing the stomach."
"And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize it with three cauteries using an olive-shaped cautery."
"And let the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire gut; and afterward carefully treat that area until it is healed."
Chapter XLI
"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
"When pain arises at the opening of the anus due to friction and moisture, the illness is cured by what we have said earlier, but if it becomes chronic, then you should relieve the illness from thick humors with pills made from fetid substances or artificial pills or resembling them; and afterward cauterize that area."
"And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire."
"Know according to two methods, of which one is that you should cauterize that area at the opening of the anus with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and do so with good depth." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the finger, and if an olive-shaped or large cautery is used."
"But sometimes it may happen that the cautery is placed on the middle of the head of the anus so that there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is described in the cautery of dislocation of the anus, letting it be a continuous circle and burn the thickness of the entire gut."
"And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the anus and does not extend into the hip."
"But if it extends into the hip, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the hip at the location where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the thigh a little above the right side."
"And if a knife-shaped cautery is used, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the gut."
"And if the illness extends such that the pain is felt near the said hip, then cauterize there where you feel it with a cautery having three points or four or more if necessary."
"And if the illness extends pain behind the hip, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery."
"And be careful in all cauteries not to finish with the cautery so as to burn nerves or major arteries, and thus cause harm or contraction over the illness."
"And I have seen some of those who cauterize over the thigh and end up in cautery burn the flesh within such that the swelling reached the foot, and the foot was perforated and corrupted." "And especially hot applications to the belly cause diarrhea, and especially this is fatal."
"And if pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one according to this manner."
"And some wise men said in cautery of the anus that this is its manner: it should resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is about a palm's length, and it should be slightly above its opening according to the thickness of a date bone or less."
"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a hazelnut shell. And those circles should have two openings, and their length should be a nut or two nuts, and make their margin of decently thick iron well-applied in the circles; this is its shape:"
"And especially it should be heated in the fire until it gets red-hot and emits sparks, and especially it should be placed on the part of the anus where the pain is located, with the patient lying on their side." "And then cauterize there with three cauteries at once."
"And especially do not leave that for more than three days; do not plaster it with mud and do not leave the wound open for too many days; and cure it with ointment so that it heals."
"Albucasis says: 'O son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its appearance and because few are found who regard it.'"
"But of those cauteries, he finds them useful who suffers from it, and he will find relief with this one."
"But cautery with adherent medications is that you make two circles having an armilla pierced in which put the end of the iron door-bolt, whose length should be equal to its thickness."
"And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:"
"And especially place it on the part of the anus where there is pain while the patient lies on their side, and compress your hand over the part of the anus; and take hot water from the fire and pour it between two circles, and keep that heat for about an hour until the pain stops biting and adhering to it — because this way one finds burning like fire — until the biting ceases."
"And especially raise your hand with the instrument and cleanse all the hot water from around the anus with sweet water."
"And especially leave it for three days and place mud on it until the blackness of the burn is removed, and let it be for a few days, and then it will become tender; this is its final treatment."
"And especially cure it with ointment until it heals."
"And if the pain extends into the hip or thigh, do to it as is done with the anus in this way:"
"This is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications." "Take alkali and unslaked lime mixed in equal parts one, grind them together and place them in a new pot whose bottom is pierced with a small hole according to how much enters into it."
"And place another pot upside down on the bottom of the first pot, and pour onto it alkaline water mixed with sweet water up to one finger's width, and then compress it with your hand for good compression, and let the hot water from the first pot flow into the inverted pot through the hole in its bottom."
"Then gather all that water and pour it onto another live source or renewed alkali, for at this point it will have great acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterizations of other members, for fire operation causes it."
"And similarly with some medications used to cauterize widely, such as teesizic and melancratic and soap in the same way that they are mixed."
"And Galen recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure by which sciatica vein pain is healed, and greatly praises him as being very skillful, saying that there is no need for any other treatment, since he heals it with just one visit, because the ointment in bath water and eyewash already knows his condition."
"And if green celery cannot be found, then fresh figs should be taken; and they should be finely chopped with a little rue and placed on the water where the pain is felt, or on the thing itself, or on the couch, and it should be bandaged."
"And it should be left for a period of three hours, or as much time as the patient feels necessary for the adherence to subside."
"And then that person should take a bath and afterwards, when his body is warm, he should lie down on the ground, for the pain ceases and he is healed."
"And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medications unless there is an evacuation of the body."
"But already Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's foot, it heals very well; and this is the manner of cauterizing: wool should be taken and dipped in ancient oil, and placed between the heels and the balls of the feet."
"And also take dried goat's foot, inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it lie there until it cools." "And repeat this process until the sensation of pain reaches the water and then remove the heat source to relieve the pain."
"And this manner of cauterizing is called 'cautery of vacua'."
"Chapter XLII."
"Of the cauterization of pain in the teeth."
"Sometimes pain is felt in the back due to various causes, such as by compression or by shock or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infiltration of moist and humid matter."
"And cauterization should only be performed in this one specific case which is caused by the effusion of hot matter."
"Therefore, after evacuation of the pain with pills of bdellium and similar ones, which should be made on the back where the pain is felt three lines wide according to its width, since each line contains ten cauteries or more, according to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient and the strength of the cautery."
"And cauterization should be performed with cauteries of point shape."
"If you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using a round-point cautery in this way:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"Of cauterization at the beginning of a boil."
"Many times this illness occurs in young children, and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that it happens suddenly on their skin and increases and moves."
"And notice the last vertebra in the back and neck where the boil has already begun to rise above the others."
"Therefore when you see this and wish to prohibit it, immediately cauterize that spot with a circular-shaped cautery in this way:" "That the cautery should take up the entire width of the vertebra evenly."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point-shaped cautery two or three lines deep." "And let the points be close together between them."
"And then treat the spot until it is healed with what we have said."
"But be careful not to administer a cautery for a boil that has been caused by a spasm of nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
Cautery treatment for gout and joint pain
When joint pain is caused by rough humors that are enclosed in each member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, physicians usually call this gout properly.
And therefore, since gout caused by rough humors is treated with a curette and pains are not completely removed, then cautery is used to remove them.
It is necessary to cauterize precisely that proper evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint with hot irons.
And this is the form of olive oil cautery:
And if it is necessary to make a point on the fascia of the foot, then do so with cautery. And if pains extend to the ankles or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize each affected spot with three or four cauteries altogether using olive oil cautery.
And if you need more cauteries than these cauteries are necessary, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, so that it is only around the circumference of the cord.
And if pains extend to the other toe, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the big toe and it is called "suagra," then puncture in the circuit of the joints as they turn, puncturing these two lines.
And if pains remain in those [toes], then puncture in the circuit of the joints on each knot and on the base of the hand.
And if pains extend near here to the tendons or muscles, then cauterize all around the assistants (ligaments).
And do not evacuate the illness without proper regimen and receipt of medicines, for if good regimen is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery alone, it will be healed, God willing.
Chapter XL.V
Of cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the thigh or hip bones breaking before reaching the anus to the genitals, and this begins to approach, then it is necessary that you command the patient to leave his food on his day and to use gentle laxatives so that the wound opening from his belly.
And then accompany the patient between your hands on his side and command him to hold his breath inside so that the anus or buttocks are forced out or appear.
And then return him with your hands and press on the fracture over the bone of the penis with such force that it resembles the majority of circles to the upper divided parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
"Until it becomes very hot." "And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out."
"You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands."
"And then place the cauterizer on that mark with your right hand, and use it to cauterize the opening where the penis enters the abdominal wall; repeat this process until you have completely closed the opening."
"And carefully observe the sensation of the intestine during your cauterization, ensuring that you do not burn it, lest great harm come to the patient."
"You should know that if you do not catch the opening with the cautery, your operation has failed."
"And it is necessary that the cautery of children be thin according to their size and proportion."
"And then take care of the cauterized area for three days by applying a border of lint so that the burn scar may heal properly."
"And then care for it with other remedies until it is healed."
"And the patient should rest on their back for forty days to ensure that the opening is sealed and the wound is healed."
"And it is necessary to control the patient's diet according to the duration of their treatment, so that their abdomen does not prolapse due to excessive exertion."
"And then, forty days after the operation, carefully administer a laxative and keep the patient for another forty days."
"And the patient should avoid heavy work, excessive eating and drinking, and violent coughing, because if they follow this regimen for complete healing, they will be healed."
"And I will also describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. If they do not heal on their own, cauterize them with a round cautery according to their size, and treat them as described above. And if they are not healed by this method, then..."
"And some earlier authorities have said that ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in the following manner:"
"And a line is drawn across the width of the rupture on either side, and another line above it. Then place your hand with a cautery spike on top, but use the lighter and better one first."
"Chapter XLVI."
"On cauterizing a hernia."
"When there is pain in certain members due to a tumor or percussion and the pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
"And the cautery should be applied according to the size and proportion of the member, its strength and weakness, the location of the tumor, and the intensity of the pain."
"Therefore, if it does not heal with the first cautery, then repeat the application of the cautery. For it is customary for those pains to be punctured in the member nearest to the one causing them, so that they should be cauterized until the patient is healed."
"Chapter XLVII."
"On cauterizing leprosy."
"Some types of leprosy are sometimes treated with cautery but without much benefit. And it is harmful if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile."
"And therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is commingled and whether it has been cured with what we have said in the division. And if not, then beware of applying the cautery over the entire body and all its members, for then cauterize it on the head as follows: one cautery in the middle of the head, one on either side near the hairline, two on the horns of the skull, and one behind on the nape or servants."
"And finally press with the cautery a little bit until it leaves an impression on the bone, and then remove the scabs, so that the expiration of thick fumes may be relieved. And cauterize on the chest as necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the entire body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on either cheekbone, and two cauteries on either shoulder blade, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttocks themselves, and two on each ankle, and one on each shinbone, and two on each knee, and two on each thigh, and two on the tendons of the heel. And cauterize it over all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and over each heel of the feet, and over the fossa of the arms."
"And beware of the nerves that lie on the heel lest you burn them."
"Sometimes it is also cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone and another on the mouth of the stomach and yet another on the liver."
"And know that the closer you apply the cauteries, the greater will be the benefit and relief. And know that the disease does not feel pain from the cautery, as people do, because its body is already stunned."
"And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is required by the species of instruments."
"And after cauterizing, apply a plaster made from bran with honey, and also use other treatments until it is healed."
"Chapter XLVIII."
"On cauterizing stupor."
"When some member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to its size."
"And let your cautery enter the thickness of the flesh a little bit." "And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed."
"And sometimes some paralysis which affects the arms and legs, the vertebrae of the back, and near the origin of the nerves that move that member is cauterized, and the paralysis is removed."
"But let only one who knows well the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves through all the moving body presume to do this."
"Chapter XLIX."
"On cauterizing warts that are turning white."
"When warts are old and not improved by any medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize them with a pointed cautery a little bit according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh until the whiteness and color of it are removed and its color is changed."
"And then apply to it bran and lentil flour with rose oil and arnagosa leaves, and dove's blood or hen's blood, each one part, and all mixed together. And then let a cloth be moistened and placed on the location until it is healed."
"Chapter L."
"On cauterizing cancer."
"When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference just as it is turned."
"And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it. But this does not seem good to me because I fear that it would become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes."
"It would be more appropriate to cauterize around him in a circle like we mentioned earlier, or with several cauteries."
"Chapter Two."
"On the cautery of haemorrhoids."
"When some haemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, this is due to their superfluity or the state of the patient's health - whether they are old and decrepit, lack blood, or it has been a long time. If you wish to hasten the maturation of haemorrhoids, cauterize around them using several small punctures; leave those alone which have not yet reached maturity."
"But if you wish to cause a perforation with the cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is as follows: and place it in the middle of the haemorrhoid until it pierces the skin."
"And if you cauterize that area which is away from where the haemorrhoid was protruding, so that the flesh of the arm is alleviated; and then dress it until it heals."
"Chapter Fifty-Two."
"On the cautery for gangrene."
"Gangrene is corruption that moves through the limb, consuming it just as dry wood is consumed by fire."
"Therefore, if you wish to cauterize gangrene where it suffers cautery with fire, then heat several small and large cautery needles according to what is suitable for that area affected by gangrene."
"And then cauterize it entirely until you have eliminated all corruption and there remains no cause of it."
"And then leave it alone for three days, and afterward wash the cauterized areas with a cloth dipped in olive oil mixed with honey until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is removed."
"And then dress it with soft flesh-producing ointment."
"But if after three days you find that the flesh grows healthy where there was no corruption, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery on whatever remains in the corrupted areas."
"And gangrene is sometimes treated with sharp medicine, for that is half treatment instead of cautery." "But cauterization with fire is the easiest way to bring relief."
"And I have already spoken about the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the previous section, and therefore take that when you begin treating it."
"Chapter Fifty-Three."
"On cautery for closure [of wounds] and other similar conditions."
Many times it happens that the patient's foot is called claw, and this is a cause of thickness, entering, which makes the foot swell; and there are two ways to cauterize in these cases, which is cauterizing with fire and cauterizing with cold water.
Cauterizing with fire is done by heating the cautery until it resembles a vulture's feather, which should be made of iron according to the size that can contain the claw in its entirety, and it should have fine margins.
Then place that heated cautery on the claw, and carefully move your hand with the cautery around the edge of the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw. Leave it for three days until it begins to heal. Then apply a plaster made of wild mallow leaves crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because that will help to draw out the inflammation.
Then dress the wound with regenerative ointment until it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, especially in the breasts and thighs, then you should administer cauterization with cold water in those cases. And it is done by taking a quill made of iron or bronze or vulture's feather, and placing that on the claw; then fill the quill with a small amount of cold water, hold your hand steady, and press the edge of the quill into the root of the claw while the cold water enters the front of the claw's root. Wait for the pain to subside from the cold water for about an hour, then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be drawn out.
And so do this on those two until all of them are removed from your body.
Then dress the wounds where the roots of the claws have been removed with ointment that makes flesh grow.
Chapter 44
Of cautery for tremors
When someone has a tremor due to coldness in the nerves or fever caused by coldness, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the shoulders of the back, placing one cautery between each pair of vertebrae; and also cauterize the sole of their foot, and once on the stomach.
And if it is due to coldness, then the tremor will be calmed down and recovery from the cold illness will be hastened.
Chapter 45
Of cautery for accidental wounds of the body
When the body has been wounded accidentally and there are pustules with fissures that have formed from corrupted matter, then at first sight it should be cauterized on top of each fistula with a small cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated in fire; or with long tongs for burning; or with a lenticular cautery.
And afterwards it should be cauterized frequently at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not to be believed, and the superfluity is disrupted doing these things, and they will heal from them.
But nevertheless it is necessary that this should first be done by evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter 46
"Treatment of accidental blood flow by incision cauterization."
"When veins are wounded by an incision made during surgery, which then flows out or where there is an aperture, the wound must be caueterized with boiling water and afterwards healed."
"If it happens to someone like that, at once you should put your hand on the wound and press on it until those veins are stopped so that the blood flow stops."
"And similarly press on the cauterizing iron until the oil lamps are extinguished, both large and small in number, and blow on them so that they do not reignite."
"And take one of those iron rods, small or large according to the location and size of the wound where the artery is broken, quickly press it on that vein until you have stopped the bleeding, and cauterize it so that it is sealed and restricts the blood flow."
"And if blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove the cautery and tighten it, then take another one carefully from those cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing so until the bleeding has stopped."
"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest you bring harm upon yourself or another ill fate."
"And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop it in any other way except with a cautery as mentioned above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of the membrane are burned and the bleeding stops. Or it can be tied with thread or adhesive with strong tension, or medicinal substances whose property is to stop bleeding should be applied; and they should be pressed with a compress and binding."
"But he who administers proper restriction of the artery with thread or adhesive and tension with cloths or by placing causes for burning and similar things, does not commit a fault, but is deemed worthy."
"But if this is done by someone else and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with gentle pressure of the index finger on the wound of that vein as mentioned above, and understand to make a great constriction within so that the blood may be stopped from the highest part of the wound, and do not remove the finger; and sprinkle cold water on the artery so that the blood may congeal and thicken; and see if cautery or medicine is necessary."
Of incisions, punctures, evacuations and of phlebotomy and wounds and their like.
We have already mentioned in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and with medicinal substances that burn, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them with their forms. And we have ordered the chapters from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter likewise so that it may be easier for whoever wants it; therefore I will discuss what he will ask about.
And before I begin this, know that in this chapter there is nothing but what was discussed in the first chapter about cautery.
And because it is necessary that caution be great, for in the operations discussed in this chapter many evacuations are performed which are with blood through which life depends. Therefore, it is necessary to perform aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or opening of an abscess or purification of the wound or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and their like with caution. And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and many of them often result in death.
And I advise you to be careful about what you do not hesitate about, for sometimes you may treat people with many diseases. And among them are some who become angry with their illness and it is easy for death to occur from that because of the severity of their disease, its duration, and fear of the disease which indicates death.
And among them is he who gives you his wealth and says, "Wait for my health," but his illness is dangerous.
Therefore do not consent to anyone who comes to you with this attitude. Let your caution be greater than greed and your desire for wealth. And do not presume any cause unless it is based on certain knowledge which confirms that, and through which praiseworthy success may occur.
And use in the treatment of all your patients prognosis and indication of when health will be restored, for that is your helper in acquiring fame and remembrance, praise and glory.
O, children, God breathes into you His understanding and does not take away from you guidance and protection, for that is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter divided into chapters according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery and cure from the head to the foot so that you may easily find what you ask about and for which you have need.
Chapter one.
Of the treatment of water contained in the head of children
Know that this disease often happens to children at birth and when the midwife squeezes the child's head during delivery.
And sometimes it occurs for unknown causes which are not understood.
But I have only seen this disease in children; and of all those whom I saw, death occurred to them. And for that reason it seems to me that this is a hopeless condition in such cases.
And I have seen that the head of one child was full of water and his head continued to swell so much that it could not stop on its own because of the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased until he died.
And this humidity is either collected between the fontanelle and the bone or collected behind the bone above the cerebral hemispheres.
For the operation in that case if the humidity is between the fontanelle and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head in the latitudinal direction, and let the length of the incision be about two fingers so that the humidity may flow out. And this is the form of the spatula:
"And if humidity has increased more and the boil has grown larger, then here are two incisions to be made in this manner:"
"And if humidity is left behind, a sign of this is that you can open the corners of the mouth widely and water comes out when you squeeze those inside with your hand, but it doesn't get swallowed." "Therefore, you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
"and near the incision remove all humidity; and then strain the incisions with cloths and swabs; and on the fifth day pour wine and oil over it, and then loosen the bandage and cure the wound with plasters and dressings, and bind the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed."
"And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be larger in the occiput, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore attend to the incision where the boil and the collection of water appear, and do then what seems best to you."
"And observe that you should not cut the artery, and endeavor that blood does not flow, nor let the patient suffer through that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Chapter two
When, after all treatments or medications applied to the eyes or face have proved ineffective and the condition worsens, the last resort in this case is the cutting of those two arteries.
And then when you want to cut those arteries that the patient has raised their head, and near there rub firmly with coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and also tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the places above the places that are near the ears below, and they do not show except in some men.
And then carefully press on the artery with your finger and cut each one with a scalpel having two pointed blades entering into the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it through at the incisions made above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide because when any vein is cut, blood will gush out with a pulsating exit, which flows forth in frequent spurts.
But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear the amount of space equal to three fingers width and press down with your finger and cut through the bone.
And that which causes the blood to flow abundantly is about one pound's worth, and some people get more or less of it, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the power of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of the fracture on the bone, then cut that away so that no abscess may occur.
And then stitch up the wound with feathers and cloth strips, and also treat it with ointment inside so that it may heal.
Chapter III
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When some ancient migraine or sharp pain occurs due to dampness and heat in the temples, or if it is similar to ancient but violent ones, and it is treated with medicinal remedies without success, then we have tried in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair from the temples where the arteries are located. And understand where the artery appears in the temple because it will be shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in few men due to the violence of the disease.
And if it is hidden, then wrap the patient's head with some cloth and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes manifest. And then take the scalpel which has this shape: And then cut through the skin with that easily until you reach the artery. Then tie it off and extract it from above towards the sides until you extract it completely from the skin and uncover those tunnels which are on both sides of it, entirely separated.
But if the artery is small, then tie off one end of it with a needle and cut through it in such a way that its ends are extended and contracted to prevent any flow of blood, because if they are not cut through, blood will not flow out completely.
And then evacuate three or four ounces of blood from it.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it off in two places with strong double thread made of cotton or long cords so that it does not rot before the wound heals and thus prevent any flow of blood.
And then cut through the excess tissue between the two threads, and do this at that time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize the cut ends of the artery with a caustic iron or scissors cautery so that they are sealed and prevent any oozing of blood. This will serve in place of stitching it up.
It is better if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion, because cauterization helps to increase the heat and dryness which are helpful in this case. Therefore, it is better for treatment.
And it is necessary that after the extraction of the arteries, you should sprinkle the wound area with powdered frankincense properly and then treat it with drying medications to promote healing and ointments so that it heals quickly.
And if during the operation there is any bleeding from the artery again, then you should stop that blood flow by compressing it with a clamp or cauterizing it with caustic iron, or pressing some cotton on the wound area with your hand until the bleeding stops. And if none of those causes are present, then press your finger on the wound area until the bleeding stops. Then rinse the wound with cold water to cool it down and then dress it according to what is necessary.
And what is easily overlooked in the extraction of an artery is that you should also cauterize the vein at the same time with this two-pronged cautery. After you have pierced both places with a tent, place each prong into them separately and ignite them one by one until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places so that what remains between its ends is elongated because it has not been completely consolidated by this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of both prongs be equal. But if they are too sharp, it is better to have two prongs that are not very sharp because if they are too sharp, they may cut through the flesh with great speed.
Therefore, since there is some thickness to them, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut through gently.
And this procedure is better than any other and easily performed.
And let the space between the two prongs be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four
Of the treatment of painful and acid tears from the eyes.
When there are acid tears, it is the disease of those veins that are on top of the head and they do not respond to any medical treatment. Sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they feel a sensation of ants crawling on their forehead as if they were being bitten by ants. The eyelids become thin, moistened with tears so much that the lashes stick together and the inner corners of the eyes are scarred by the acidity of the tears. The old remedies for this condition are useless and no help can be found in them.
"It is necessary to order the patient to shave the hair that is on their forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equally spaced vertical lines according to its length." "And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little below the movement of the muscles that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side."
"And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws." "And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers."
"And if you have a sponge or dry cloth dipped in water with which to wipe away the blood."
"And then insert the spatula of two sharp points between them, and this is the shape of its incision." "That is to say, it starts from the temples up to the second incision." "And excise with it all the skin that is between two incisions up to the pericranium which is on the bone, and then do the same thing with the middle incision up to the second incision." "And then place this spatula inside and insert another instrument called a cutellar into the first incision again, which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And press the sharp side of that against the flesh attached to the skin, and the other side onto the bone inside it, and use this tool to reach the middle fissure and cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels."
"But make sure that the incision continues until it reaches the skin, and then do this in the middle fissure up to the other fissure."
"And when there is an equal amount of bleeding, press the places where the blood vessels are joined together with your fingers."
"And then press in each fissure with cotton wool soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that there is no formation of pus."
"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then treat this with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds may heal."
"Chapter V"
"Of the treatment of wounds by cauterization and the vessels descending from the openings inside the head."
"When there are sharp and continuous veins, and the eyelids of the sick person are thin and small, and their sight has become weakened, and the eyelashes are ulcerated and their hair is falling out, and there is sharp and painful pain in the forehead with consequent swelling, know that these matters and cauterization come from tiny veins originating from inside."
"And the best treatment for this is: command the sick person to raise their forehead, and then make an incision in it at the middle point of the forehead, a little way across (beginning with the fissure of the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be made into the bone; and extend your hand out from the lacertus temporalis muscles which are attached to the cheek), until the bone is uncovered."
"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or with cloth." "And then apply on top of it powders soaked in wine and oil to prevent the formation of pus."
"And when you remove this and see that the pustule has decreased, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where the flesh begins, and then treat it with a dry ointment which causes the flesh to be released, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an ointment from these and apply it to these wounds on raw flesh."
"Chapter VI"
"The treatment for that which falls into the ears."
"All that falls into the ears is of four kinds: it may be mineral matter or something similar to stone, like iron and lead; or it may be plant-like, like chickpeas or broad beans; or it may be fluid like water or vinegar and things like them; or some kind of creature."
"If a stone or other cause like those that do not fit or grow in the ear falls into it and blocks the ear, then pour olive oil or sesame oil into it drop by drop until it runs out. Then administer the extraction of it, and make them sneeze conditionally, and plug their nose during the onset of sneezing." "And also insert into the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upwards in those parts where these causes are forgotten."
"And if it is not extracted, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called 'subtle syriatic hook', which has this form:"
"And if it is not extracted with the hook, then do so with a thin and slightly bent piece of wire."
"And if it is not extracted with that either, then make a tube of silver and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube enters." "And then extract it with a strong suction using the small wind, as is often done with what we have described."
"But if it is not extracted in this way, then take a heated spoonful of salt or sometimes a prepared wick with which chickens are grasped by one foot, and place that on the end of the ear canal, and wrap cloth around it gently placed." "And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and remove the ear from humidity."
"And if it is not extracted with all the causes that we have described, then you should cut off that before an abscess or spasm occurs."
"And the way to cut it off is that you first sanctify the patient's left cephalic vein and extract blood according to the method of its virtue, then make that seethe between your palms and return the ear to its original position, and finish with a small incision in the skin of the ear near where the bone was pressed upon." "And the incision should be crescent-shaped and reach to the ear bone. Once the bone is exposed, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments, then quickly suture the incision, and dress the wound until healed."
"And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the hairs that has grown and swollen up, then administer the cure and extraction of it. But if you do not succeed with your attempt, then take a fine thin spatula according to this form:" "And use that spatula to perform the excision of that hair which has fallen into the ear."
"And do not do this if you think that the hair has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear. Rather, take it out in pieces and then extract those pieces with tweezers or gentle forceps, or use the incision method mentioned above, for extraction is made easier this way."
"But if water enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning and fill his ear with a little cotton wool, then cover that ear with another piece of cloth. If that does not work, then take thin, pointed sticks or rods according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire a bit, and the patient should insert one of those into their ear canal and press on one side of that rod with one hand while striking it on the other side with another stick." "So continue doing this until all the water is removed."
"So continue doing this until all the water is removed." "And if the water cannot be removed in this way, then take some paper or gauze, insert one end of it into the ear and extend the other end over a flame until most of it is burned."
"And then take another piece of gauze and repeat this until all the water is removed, then remove that with a cannula as described above."
"But in the extraction of an insect entering that ear, if it is a small creature, proceed as described above. But if it is a large creature causing dizziness, then administer its extraction with tweezers and forceps, for this cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear."
"But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said in this division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not succeed, then you should examine the ear in sunlight."
"And then if you see any cause of the worms, extract them with gentle or fine forceps. But if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula made thus: narrow below and widening above, whose form is as follows:" "And insert the narrow end of this cannula into the ear according to what the patient can endure. Then suck through it with great force and repeat this many times until all the worms are removed."
"But if you do not succeed with this attempt, then plug and close the opening of the cannula with wax as mentioned above. Then administer distillations which have already been proved in the ancient cure for worms, and you will find that in the treatise on distillations."
"And let your effusion be such that when you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows:" "And make it of silver or bronze, narrow below and having a small canal above and flat on top."
"And then let there be a hole in the concavity of the cannula where it is necessary to pour the oil through." "And if you wish, take a reed and cover its end decently with cotton, then pour oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or whatever medicinal substance you desire into the cannula — which is in the ear — then insert the reed covered with cotton on top and gently press it with your hand so that the oil may be expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should already have been scaled over a gentle fire." "And be sure that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too hot, for medicinals for the ear cannot endure this."
"Chapter VII."
"Of the treatment of stoppage of ears."
"Sometimes some children issue from the wombs of their mothers not yet perforated, and it has happened to some men that there is blockage in the entrance of the ear by mucus or flesh fallen into it; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the end of the canal of the ear which does not cause dizziness, and sometimes it occurs outside its parts."
"And that which happens at the entrance of it, which does not comprehend dizziness, is in the worst conditions for difficult cure."
"But if it causes dizziness, then you should place the patient's ear to the sun and look at that." "And if you notice swelling, open it gently with a sharp scalpel of this form:"
"And the end of it where you want less width, one side should be sharp and the other not; and the scalpel should have two flat sides so that it doesn't harm the ear."
"And if the swelling is due to skin in the ear or the cheek, then use small sharp scissors and cut carefully along the most visible line so that all the skin is removed."
"And if there is swelling on the front of the ear, then take a fine red-hot probe and heat it in fire a little, and apply it to the flesh of the ear."
"And if you feel swelling with what the illness finds easy to reach, for severity of hearing loss, relieve its pressure gently; and take care not to injure the nerves of the ear."
"And next, apply a bandage of linen around the ear according to its size that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or if the ear is already inflamed, then you must cauterize the inflammation and replace it with another wick which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil, until the inflammation is healed; and then treat it until it is cured."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation."
Chapter VIII
On the treatment of inflammation that affects the eyelids.
Inflammation that affects the eyelids may sometimes be moist, and at other times dry.
Therefore, you should have either of these with you: honey or onion, and grind them into their juices, and then apply them to the places that are affected.
But if pain comes with a flow of blood, then cauterize it with a fine silver needle.
The best cauterization is when incisions and wounds are seen to return only if some cause of their recurrence remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned and do not return.
Here comes the next sentence:
"Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids."
"Often seen in the eyelids is some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called swelling."
"And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower and upper eyelid."
"The operation is to consider the hours if the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and extends throughout, and its cause is light."
"Therefore make an incision along the width, then carefully observe throughout its extent with ease, and then suspend it with a ligature and cut it off."
"And if the wound is large, then you join it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed."
"And if it is small, you will not have any harm from that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it."
"And if the swelling is declining towards the inside of the eyelid, you should consider its surface inside, therefore raise the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a ligature except that you do not make an incision, and press it throughout its extent, and if the eyelid by means of an incision is lengthened, then this is not done for any cause."
"And especially with the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the place with something that heals until it is healed."
"Chapter .x."
"On the treatment of inflammation on the eyelid above the wound."
"Inflammation is heat that is generated in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially in children, it aggravates wounds and accidents occur to their sight, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow from them."
"And therefore you cause those to lie on their backs all the time and also sleep with them on their faces; and place moist compresses on their eyelids which are already covered by inflammation and imminent danger is apparent in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel pulsation there."
"And there is some manner of operation in that which the illness causes him to hold his head down with his chin on his chest and also to wrap a cloth around it and make for him a bandage according to the quantity that contains warmth of the whole part, and place that over that and press with your fingers throughout until pulsation has accumulated in the middle of the bandage, and then finish in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incidentally with an incision through the latitude, and let the incision not be greater than the incision made in trepanation."
"But if you cover the forehead so that you cut through the entire cord until you reach pulsation, for in many cases process occurs through a fistula according to the form of white heat."
"Then remove that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers on the parts before and roll it between your right and left hands until it has disappeared."
"And be careful that you do not enter the incision with the spatula for fear of reaching the eye and damaging it."
"But if your pulsation does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert into the incision a little with facility until pulsation occurs, and then remove it as we have said; and then wrap cloths in vinegar and wine and place them on the place and strain those with powders."
"And some who throw salt and place it in the concavity of the incision for fear that something remains of that humidity."
"And then care for him until he is healed."
"But if an abscess occurs in the place after cauterization, cure it with cedar plasters until it is healed."
"Chapter XI."
"Methods for examining the patient's condition."
"When the eyelids of patients are not separated by their natural lashes due to adhesions, then it is necessary for us to examine them and determine methods for treating illnesses such as persistent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and tissue between them which cause harm to the patient's eyes. There are four treatments for this: either cautery with fire or acute medicine, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or it can be treated by incision and suturing; or by using tubes, as I will explain."
"And then you should hold the patient's head still with your left hand; carefully turn their eyelid upwards with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good. But if not, insert a needle into the part of the eyelid where the lashes are sparse and further from the edge of the eyelid. Then make the needle penetrate the flesh above the eyelid, but close to the edge where the lashes grow. Then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned up and turn it back down."
"And then make an incision with scissors into the part of the eyelid inside and below the lashes, entering through the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one. Then remove the thread and press gently with small pieces of cotton or cloth on the eyelid to stop any bleeding. Finally, mark the eyelid with a stitch, making it resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf."
"But nonetheless, the shape of the stitch should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this has already been diversified among people. For some patients require a large incision in the eyelid corresponding to the amount by which it is swollen."
"And then cut with scissors along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct and entering into the smaller one." "And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, it should be no wider than the thickness of a knife's edge."
"And then place a clamp on one of the two ends of the cord and carefully excise it all. Then adjust the two lips with wax or thin wool thread and wipe away any blood. If you wish to do so, make the excess threads adhere together with some adhesive substance on both sides of the eyebrow. Otherwise, do not bother."
"And then leave the stitches in for three or four days and then remove them and care for it."
"And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and care for it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid swells due to the sealing of the wound and the application of the ointment. But stitching is better."
"But nevertheless, if there is great concern about the illness, it should be done with care and good intentions, and not out of fear."
"And there is another way to stitch, which is to mark on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf and then lift up the eyelid with three needles placed and gathered according to this shape:"
"But if this is not possible, then hold the needles and do not let them go out of shape. Then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure. Enter the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct. Adjust these threads evenly between your fingers. Then raise your hand gradually, raising the entire cord on which you have marked according to what we have recommended."
"And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and care for it until it is healed."
"But if an abscess forms at your incision or cut, lance it with cauterization and apply lint soaked in honey."
"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid become turned inwards. In this case you should use what we have said about incision, but stitching is better for each one."
"To stitch with needles, do it like this:" "And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut along the figure that is inside as I have described. Then artificially make two needles or two thin awls, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width should be less than the width of the incision." "And you have already cut at both ends where you will have the threads."
"Then carefully apply each one to the excess skin on top of the eyelid and tighten the needles at both ends with great force. Leave them like this for a few days, because the cord will die due to the tightening and will shrink and fall in as you put it."
"But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers and care for the wound until it heals."
"So when it is healed, the eyelid is lifted up and the hairs will not prick."
"And these are the two needles that you should make like this:" "And have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less."
"Chapter XII"
"Of raising prickly hairs on the eyebrow with a needle when the hair is hard."
"When the hairs on the eyebrows are not natural, hard and rough, then it is necessary to take a subtle needle and tie onto it a thin thread of cedar and lion's hair. Then carefully adjust both ends of it." "And let the length of the threads be about a palm in length."
"And then take another subtle thread and tie it onto the first one shortly afterwards. Then knot both ends if you wish to."
"And then hold your patient's head in place on the table and position yourself near the sun so that your work is clearly seen because it is a subtle and delicate operation."
"And then insert the needle into the root of the hard hair that needs to be removed and make it penetrate quickly through the eyelid until you pull it out above the natural hair."
"And then remove the hair from there and insert it into a vessel containing quicklime. Let one, two or three hairs be inserted at once and not more than that."
"And then remove your hand from the container when the hair has been completely cleaned with quicklime. Then insert it back into the eyelid among the natural hairs."
"But if the hair is dragged through quicklime but is not removed, then drag the quicklime onto the threads that you have tied with it, until the hair becomes completely clean."
"And then leave it alone for the view of the eyebrow because you will then remove the quicklime and the thread. Then gently rub each one and close the eyelid and leave the stitches in place for two or three days until the hair adheres to its proper place and grows with good flesh."
"And if the hair is too short, then adjust one of the natural hairs and lift it up with that or let it grow for some space and then lift it up."
"Chapter XIII"
"Of treating chalazion, which appears on the eyelid above."
"When chalazion appears on the eyebrow, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards or to the right or left side due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or burns. It is called leporina and this chalazion can be natural or accidental, occurring due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or burns or by resemblance to their unhealthy appearance."
"The manner of operating on it is to cut into that hardened area and separate its lips and insert a wick made of linen cloth between them. Then tie them up so they heal."
"And it is not necessary that you use a cure for him from causes that dry and constrain; for if you do this, it will return to his condition worse than it was at any time."
"And use that of causes which soften, like fenugreek, and mix it with the water in which chickpeas have been boiled and strained, or with a decoction of liquorice, which should be softened with some oil, and immerse the cloth in that, and cure with it."
"And the treasure of your cure is that you persist with all zeal without being consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning."
"And this operation which we have called is nothing but a certain correction of the condition that does not return the form of the locus to what it was beforehand."
"And this is chapter fourteen."
"On the cure for echacrati that occurs in the left eyelid."
"This alxacrati which is found in the left eyelid, which is truly called alxacrati; and it is of two types: some are natural, others are accidental."
"But accidental ones occur due to blows, cuts, burns, or other similar causes."
"And the way of performing this operation is that you take a needle with which you make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
"And then stretch the flesh at its parts with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and cut with a wide-bladed scalpel." "And then if the figure of the eyelid returns to its proper shape, that is good; but if not, take a needle and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two incisions on the side of the left eyelid."
"And let the two ends of the incisions be at two angles of the incision that you have made, so that when they come together, the figure is formed."
"And this figure is Greek letter lambda (λ)."
"And then cut the flesh that much which is on the side of the sharp end of the left eye, so that it cuts the eyelid."
"And then bring together the separated parts and sew them up with a thread of wool; and then dress it with what we have said about moisturizing medicines and compresses until it heals."
"And if an alxacrati occurs due to a split or stitches or burning, it is necessary that you make a flat cut with a scalpel over the skin of the eyelid as has been preceded." "And then separate with a compress between two lips according to what we have said."
"In summary of the sermon on the treatment of alxacrati when it is above or below, the operation that occurs according to how it has been prepared varies according to its form, and it appears in various different shapes."
"And the skillful artist always prepares everything in every possible way that it is possible to him so that he makes the figure return to its natural shape or near it, and that illness according to what suits it of the operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions."
"Chapter XV"
"Of adhesions of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea."
When this condition occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified upwards with the albumen of the eye, and is prohibited from its usual movement and natural functions, then you should insert the tip of a needle underneath the eyelid, elevating it upward or extending it with a hook.
And then you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, not too sharp to avoid causing discomfort to the patient during the operation. Be careful that the spatula does not injure the eye with its sharpness.
Make your incision in such a way that it easily cuts through the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed.
Then you should put salt water in the eye, with which you wash it; or else dissolve and distill in its place.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye using forceps, and apply a compress of lanolin-infused egg albumin to the eye. On the third day, use consolidation agents so that it heals.
Capítulo XVI
Chapter XVI
"You should know that nail is produced in two manners: either nervously, and it resembles hard skin; or non-nervously, resembling congealed white humidity, which when iron touches it, forcefully takes hold of it, it is cut off, and the nail does not grow into it."
"And both species begin only from the larger lacrimal duct that gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and its movement."
"The manner of working in the incision is that the patient places their head in the position indicated by you, and at the same time opens their eyelids with your hand, and collects the nail with forceps with little duplication and extends it towards its upper edges." "And at the same time takes a needle and inserts it into that nail, about the width of a horse's or ox's hair, or cow, or similar, or strong thread, and duplicates the tip of the needle little by little and places it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates the nail with the needle, and ties the nail with thread; and extends it towards its upper edges, and removes with the thread the side of the nail that covers the pupil." "And thus you follow that with the thread until the end of it."
"Ideally, you should then make an incision near the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, removing the natural flesh of the lacrimal to prevent continuous tear flow due to incision."
"Sometimes the nail extends onto the skin or flesh, as we have mentioned, and in such cases it should be cut away using a lion's claw-shaped spatula, of which this is the form:"
"And ensure that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, nor pierce the pupil."
"After making the incision, place a small amount of salt or powdered cinnabar into it and leave it overnight. Then rinse with water until healed."
"And if the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the needle or it does not adhere to the skin, then often this type of nail can be treated with medicines, and thus healed as described in the division."
"And if you wish to incise it, then open the wound of the ulcer and take a subtle lion's claw-shaped spatula with sharp edges in this form:" "with subtlety." "If sometimes it becomes rarefied and condensed and sticks to the wound, then distill from your urine into the wound using cinnabar powder or mercury or salt crystals, and cover the wound overnight."
"And repeat the operation over it until all that is of it has been removed, so that only healthy tissue remains in the wound. For if you leave it as is, and initially treat the aposteme within so that it heals."
"And repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if seen in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread. Then cut it from there with one stroke, and do not extend the incision too much lest you cut into the tear ducts."
"And then distill mercury cinnabar powder into the lacrimal caruncle until it heals."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of incision of a pimple and of what is born from attached skin in the wound."
"Sometimes in the wounds of some eyes, rough skin is born which covers the pupil or approaches the edge of the eyelids and squeezes them together. Then it binds the eyelids tightly at their edges and becomes like a ballustrade bead."
"The operation for this condition is that the patient holds his head upright while you open the wounds of it and collect all that rough skin with suitable threads or with tweezers. Then gradually cut into it until everything has been finished without damaging any part of the wound."
"And your incision should be made with the same spatula that we recommended for nail incisions, or with little forceps suitable for such tasks according to what seems appropriate in this chapter."
"Then when your incision is completed and all that rough skin has been removed, then fill the wound with salt crystals or distill onto it rough powder like corrosive medicines. Then cover the wound from without using egg white until it is certain that no inflammation will occur."
"And if any cause of a pimple remains and is swollen with hot cautery, and you fear inflammation, then leave the wound alone and treat that inflammation with whatever it yields to. Then repeat the operation on it until it heals, and do likewise for attached skin which happens in this type of wound."
"But be sure to leave all care of the wound free for nature or accident to operate on it with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand that operation."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of collection of pus in the wound."
"Pus is rough and tough and stands over the wound preventing its operation. It delays the healing of the wound for many days."
"Therefore, at the beginning you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and whether it has no other condition than pus. Then you should collect that pus."
"And tell the patient to hold his head upright while you suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your discretion. And that thread should be of subtle doubled silk like this:"
"or like two threads gradually coming together in a single body like this:"
"And then those veins should be tied with subtle forceps using subtlety and wipe away the blood little by little until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned back."
"And be sure not to damage the wound with the edges of the spatula. And if your operation is in the middle before the sun, then be very careful in your operation so that you cut only those veins."
"And when you have completed this, then distill into the wound fresh or rough wine so that with its sharpness it will corrode what has been removed from the pus."
"But if you cannot collect everything in that hour, then plaster it all with whatever yields to its pain. Then leave it alone for a few days until the pain is relieved and there is no danger of inflammation."
"And then repeat this according to whatever manner you think fit until it heals."
"And these are the forms of forceps:"
"Chapter XIX."
"Of reduction of deviation of the nose."
"When you treat deviation of the nose with cautery or sharp burning medicine according to what is described here and it does not heal, then do not try to reduce it any further. Rather, when it becomes ripe, incise over the inflammation and extract all the moisture that is in it and its pus until the bone is revealed."
"And then when the bone is revealed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:"
"And it is called sharp head, and should be made of iron. And the head should be round like this: so that you can grasp it with your fingers. And it should be made punctate by liming or filing punctures subtly like this:"
"And place that on the corrupted part of the bone. Then turn it between your fingers and press your hand little by little until you know that all corruption has been scraped away."
"And after this is done several times, then restore the part with drying and astringent causes."
"Therefore, if that part is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the body of the wound has separated from the healthy part and it remains for forty days without being renewed or inflamed and without any accident happening to it, then you know that it is healed."
"But if not, then do not try to reduce it any further. Rather, reduce the deviation of the nose back into its original shape in this manner: And when you have exposed the second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is revealed, then take a chisel of this shape:"
"The end of it should be triangular in iron. And its shaft should be primly thinned until near the end like this:"
"And then place that on the bone, near the lacrimal bone. And extend your hand a little way from the wound. Then turn your hand with the chisel until it penetrates all the bone. And the patient should feel as if air were coming out of there when you move his hand."
"Therefore, then restore that part with astringent and drying medicines as described here."
Therefore when flesh is cut and the area hardens, then the matter which flowed outwards returns to its place, therefore this is easier for the patient.
Chapter XX
On the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
When the swelling has reached its fullness and no harm or decrease occurs in the appearance, then you should leave the patient alone, and then follow him, and then place cupping glasses on his neck without scarification and suck well; and then apply a liniment on the swelling which is made from gum acacia, aloe, sesame, and scammony, and then press the poultice on the swelling with many powders.
The method of making the powders is that you take cloths from the lion's mouth, and each cloth should be folded in four layers; and make them from those powders.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that he needs And then press on them with a hard cloth with strong pressure; and repeat the cupping glasses with sucking without scarification; and then remove the cupping glasses and let him rest during the day and night.
But if meanwhile the bandage becomes softened, it should be made tight again
And then remove the bandage during the day and night as we have said
And if sometimes the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the poultice with the powders and pressure and cupping glasses until he is healed.
Chapter 21
**On the Incision of the Prominence of the Tunic Uvea.**
When disruption occurs in the tunica uvea, and it is prominent, proceed to expose it outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat. The face takes on the shape of a man due to this, and if you wish to incise it, then the operation involves inserting the needle into the groove of the uvea at its lower end first, then insert another needle on the side of the lacrimal duct with a double thread. Cause the latter needle to penetrate and leave the former according to its position; then incise the location of the double thread, lifting it along with the uvea around the needle, and tighten that.
Then remove the needle and pause while leaving a wick of lanolin-infused wool in place, allowing the thread to remain with the uvea.
Then care for the wick in such a way that promotes healing and ensures that the wound is fully healed.
"Sometimes gather all parts with a cloth circle fitted over the prominent area, then carefully pierce it with a thin spatula that reaches the bone's front, causing the whitish moisture to run off and allowing the bone to descend immediately."
"And therefore strengthen what has been healed."
"Chapter XXII."
"On treating hemorrhoids."
"This condition called 'alconati' is nothing but blood that collects in the veins like descending water and is not the other."
"To treat it, make the patient sit on an upright chair and take their head in your hands on both sides. When you see blood flowing towards its outlet, stop it at once so that it does not descend further, cover the light, and observe the cause of the illness as described."
"And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is urine."
"But if the discharge of blood is not properly prepared, then seat the patient between your thighs and take a thin spatula and insert it into the skin surrounding the anus near the junction of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea. Push gently until the blood flows out."
"Then, once it is expelled, immediately apply to the area a solution of honey and water, or a decoction of fenugreek and honey."
"And then treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed."
"Chapter XXII."
"On the treatment of descending water from the anus."
"We have already discussed the types of urine and their divisions in our previous discourse on the subject, so now let us discuss what is appropriate according to health."
"Now you must firmly press your hands upon the patient's solar plexus."
And then pause your right hand on the eyelid of his left eye if the water is in the left eye; otherwise use your left hand if it's in the right eye.
And then with your right hand take a piece of cotton wool if the eye is left; otherwise use your left hand if it's right.
And then place the tip of the cotton wool near the corner of the eye towards the inner canthus and press gently while turning your hand in that direction.
And then enter into the eye with the cotton wool, ensuring it has reached the back of the tear duct.
Make sure the cotton wool is inserted as far as possible into the tear duct, which is approximately the distance from the pupil to the end of the dark part of the eye. You will see this clearly due to the transparency of the cornea.
Then place the cotton wool inside the tear duct where the water is located. Then pull it down gently once or twice and check if the water drains out immediately. If so, then the eye infection is likely resolved and the cotton wool can be removed from the eye.
Then wait a short while. If the water has drained out, then remove that cotton wool gently ensuring it is not dragged along the eye surface.
And if the water does not drain out, then gently remove the cotton wool and turn your hand slowly away from the eye. Then dissolve a small amount of salt in some water and use it to rinse the inside of the eye. Finally, apply a cotton pad soaked in rosewater oil or chamomile tea to the outer corner of the eye as a compress.
May we be among those who will pause and rest with this composition at the end of time.
And if the cotton wool does not enter into the eye due to its hardness - as is the case with some men whose eyes are quite dry - then you should use the spatula called an "albiret" which has this shape:
Then pierce the conjunctiva with it and do not insert your hand further into the tear duct. If you cannot reach the cotton wool, make a small opening to create a path for it.
And then gently insert the cotton wool as explained earlier.
Finally, complete your work by preparing the patient for sleep as follows: have them lie down on their back in a dark room and ensure they remain completely still.
And pause for the duration of the eclipse so that its nature is clear and do not move your head to the right or left during this time.
And let it remain in place according to its position until the third day.
Then remove it from that dark room on the seventh day and expose the eye to light gradually. Let them see some objects slowly and then return the eye to its original position.
And make sure to do this during the time of healing or shortly after applying the compress. However, be careful not to do this too suddenly as water may flow forcefully and cause discomfort.
But if an abscess forms, then you must remove the eye patch on the seventh day and treat it with something that will cause the abscess to burst.
Then uncover the eye and expose it to light gradually for a few days while keeping the patient in a dark room.
And then gradually move them out of that dark room and help them adjust to seeing again by exposing them to things one at a time.
Know that in surgery, the student of sight is not exempt from performing operations themselves, and therefore you should be brave about performing these procedures.
We have heard that some of those who are skilled in the art have said that it is beneficial to apply heat to the eye with a hot iron needle which has been pierced and used to suck out water.
But we have not seen this method practiced in our land nor is it written about in the books of the ancient authors. Therefore, it may be a new invention.
And these are the methods of applying compresses to treat eyes, which can be helpful for those who are unfamiliar with them:
And they should be made of either wax or iron and have their ends rounded off with this subtlety: the tip should be pointed like this ✄
Chapter XXIV.
On the Treatment of a Flesh-colored Growth in the Nose
When diverse flesh-colored growths appear in the nose, resembling either a scorpion with many feet or a polyp, this condition is called "polypus" because it resembles that sea creature. And the flesh of these growths is cancerous, painful and dark in color. The lion-colored flesh is not dark in color.
Therefore, in the case of these growths that are lion-colored but not fraudulent or cancerous, you should grasp them between your thumb and index finger and press them towards the sun, then squeeze the nostrils together and pierce those growths with a needle. Then remove it from the outside and cut through what you have grasped with a sharp, fine spatula until you know that all of the growth has been removed. If any remains for some reason and it is possible to perform an excision, then do so using one of the fine instruments easily and without leaving any behind. But if it becomes inflamed with blood or an abscess forms, then pause until the inflammation or abscess has healed. If it is one of the malignant kinds, then cut and cauterize it so that all of the blood and cavities are closed up.
Then apply a plaster made of pitch and water or wine to the nose after the excision. But if the nose becomes wet and moisture flows into the throat, then you know that it is healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is still flesh growing on the projecting bones of the nostrils where no excision has been made.
Therefore, if there is any thickness to the growth, then insert a file into it and press down on it with many presses, pausing between each press for the duration of one's finger or less. Then remove the file from the nostril with forceps or some other appropriate instrument.
And after this has been done, let the patient sneeze forcefully so that the odor is expelled from the nasal canals and falls onto his garments. Many times children at school do this kind of thing intentionally, which makes it easier for those who wish to perform this action.
And then pause with both ends of the file in place, one end outside the nose and the other inside it. Then apply a ligature made of linen around the presses that are on the file and do this until you know that the flesh has grown onto the presses of the file.
Then remove the file and pause in the nose for a few days to allow the blood to clot. Then apply a plaster made of pitch for three days or more until all that remains of the flesh has rotted away.
And finally, at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead cannula for a few days until it is healed.
But if you prefer a dry treatment, use that one instead.
And this is the form of the instrument used for purging the head with which oils and medications are distilled into the nostrils:
Make it of silver or brass, shaped like a small open lamp, round like a small basin, and the mouth likewise.
"You may desire to make a closed cannula like this one, its tip being made for purging and flat, open; which you should have ready at the end of your operation, with it you shall catch in him any liquid or water that you want from his secretions."
"Chapter XXV."
"Their noses are located at the extremities of the face."
Many times it happens at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and inflamed during those days when much care is taken with its regard.
And therefore you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of this, and erase everything. Moreover pause over the place where cautery or burning medicine is to be applied which is in place of it.
But if its incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is hard, dark, of a deep color and has little sensation. If so, do not touch it with iron, for it is a hard tumor; for many times this tumor, which you have incised into it, becomes great mischief over that person on whom it had been.
And if the tumor is of warm touch and not of dark color, then incision may be possible everywhere. Therefore evacuate the badness and incise it without fear, and cure the place with that which dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26
On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been dissolved by plague or ulceration.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilage, you should confer little on this operation unless among skilled hands.
Therefore, when it happens to someone for one of these causes, you should consider whether it is fresh plague with its blood. Then join the two lips of the ulcer with suture and properly cure it until it is healed.
"If the lips of the wound are already separated and each is healthy, then you should excise each edge that appears within so that blood does not come out." "Then approximate and suture the two lips together, strengthening those that are weak. Over these sprinkle dragon's blood powder and dress them with a piece of diaphoretic plaster or another consolidating plaster, leaving it for two or three days. Then remove it and change the plaster until the flesh is completely healed."
"But the manner of suture is that you approximate the wound edges using needles as we have described for abdominal suturing, or using catgut as you see fit."
"Chapter XXVII."
"Of the extraction of those causes that come between the lips in wounds."
"Often, especially in the wounds between the lips of some men, there appear hard pustules resembling kernels of ears, some small and others large."
"Therefore, you should excise those hardenings from either side of the lips and folds, and then perform an abscess cure using a cautery until the blood is restricted. Then wash the location with vinegar and treat it with an astringent so that it heals."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"Of incision of adherent flesh in the gums."
"Often, a piece of flesh adheres to the gum, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend that with forceps or hold it with your fingers and incise it in its entirety. Then allow the wound to heal freely without letting blood."
"And then apply a cautery or some other styptic powder or cicatrizing powder to the location."
"If that flesh returns, then cut it again secondarily, and cauterize it, for now the cautery will return it."
"Chapter XXIX."
"The reason of toothache with iron."
"If on the surface of the teeth, both front and back, and between the gums, there are rough scales, pale, sometimes blackened, with yellow or greenish pus that flows out to the gum due to corruption, then the teeth are loose."
"And then you should do this: remove the diseased teeth between your jaws and pull out their roots from the sockets, and scrape those teeth on which those scales appear, and cause it to resemble fine sand within them without causing any damage, and that is how the blackness and yellowness and other impurities are removed."
"So if that is not what you want, then you should repeat the reasoning on those until it comes to the final statement that you desire."
"And know that teeth require various kinds of files and shapes according to how your operation is prepared." "And therefore, the file with which you scrape a tooth on its front surface is different from the file with which you scrape between teeth according to other shapes, and these forms of files should be prepared by you, which you will see shortly:"
"Chapter XXX."
"Tooth Extraction."
"Ignore the pain of his tooth with all effort and strive for complete eradication of it, for there is no reason why its view should be hindered when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance that is excluded in the eradication of it."
"When the patient is about to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted. For we have seen this happen during operations by barbers."
"Therefore you must be certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scrape around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and immediately afterwards remove it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until that is accomplished."
"Then use strong forceps with good speech or sturdy structure, and hold the patient's head firmly between your thumbs so that it does not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient."
"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on both sides of the tooth with ease and effort to remove it as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is decayed or corroded, then you must fill that decay with wax and strengthen it with the end of a fine needle so that it does not break at the time of your constriction on it with forceps."
"And you must work carefully with the scalpel around all parts of the gum and guard against your strength so that you do not break it or cause it to split apart, and return upon the patient for greater pain than the first pain."
"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant barbers do in their haste and recklessness in extraction without administering what we have recommended; for often they cause great illnesses upon men which are harder to treat than the tooth itself, and the roots remain removed entirely or some of them, or they extract the tooth with some bone of the jaw as we have often witnessed."
"And therefore when extracting the tooth it is necessary to wash the mouth with hot wine or vinegar mixed with salt."
"And if there are fluxes of blood from this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize."
"The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is first removed should be of long extremities, short handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them."
"And let them be like tongs with thick handles inside, so that when you stretch them with those forceps they are not bent outwards."
"And let them be made of Indian steel, straight-edged and with teeth on the extremities which interlock with each other and stretch for strong descent. And sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia', that is to say, wide, and have great constriction."
"Chapter XXVI."
"On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones of the jaw that are locked."
When it is necessary to extract a tooth that is firmly rooted and there remains some cause, then you should place your hand on the area gently for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert some sort of cloths or compresses whose ends are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, in the shape of forceps:
The ends of them should be made like this with lime or file.
And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or compresses, then you should scrape the root and remove all of the flesh and insert the instrument that is called an atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And it should be short with a thick end and not bent so that it does not get stuck.
And if with this the root is removed, that's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are these: the shape of the first instrument is triangular with some thickness at its end:
The second instrument's shape should be triangular and have a very fine tip.
And with this instrument you will have two handles, of which one is shaped approximately as follows: "And with other instruments which are used for shaving teeth, because aid is done with this instrument which resembles an oyster shell, and this is its shape:"
"Of the triangular-shaped tip that is curved or short, let it be some thickness, not sharp-pointed so as not to prick."
"And you should know that dental tools are like and similar to other instruments."
"Yet the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself matrices according to what this operation signifies regarding diverse diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not give nor assign proper instruments due to their diverse forms."
"Yet if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or pierced, then let it be carefully treated with that which is suitable from among the instruments and forceps mentioned earlier regarding the extraction of dental roots, and aid can be given through this gesture:
"And let it be gradually reduced somewhat, and let it be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or slip until the bone is completely healed; and then restore the place with suitable medicines."
"Yet if there is a small perforation in the bone, then scrape that of that perforation and its darkness away, and cure it until it is healed."
Chapter XXXII
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When teeth are prominent beyond their natural course, especially in women and more so in venerable old women, therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not adjacent to another tooth and cannot be straightened or moved with a ligature, then extract it. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which is shaped like a pig's snout and made of Indian steel with a very sharp point.
And let your incision be such that you cut through the tooth in three days due to its hardness, and that it does not harm any other teeth.
And if it is an erupting prominent tooth, then file it down with an Indian steel file of this shape:
And let it be entirely of Indian steel and well sharpened; and let it have many small pointed ends like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are harmed or damaged. And finally smooth it off with a file and scrape it with a sharp razor.
And if it is a tooth with one side chipped and scraping the tongue, then you should file down that edge until its sharpness is blunted and smoothed out, and flattened so that the tongue does not hurt nor speech be impaired.
Chapter XXXIII
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
When damage occurs to teeth due to concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the illness cannot bear food, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then let those that are strong be restored with gold foil rather than silver, for silver becomes green and soon wears away, whereas gold does not change over time.
And let the foil be made in such subtlety and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth. The method of restoration is as follows: take the foil and take twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then twist it in two places with tweezers between the damaged ones or one if there are few, until the tissue reaches the healthy side of the other tooth. And then continue pressing the foil into the beginning of the damaged part with your hand and ease and skill until it is no longer damaged.
And let your pressure be such that you press the foil against the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and gather them together at each place with tweezers, and turn them inwards and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it like this until it is firm as rock.
But if it becomes loose or broken, press it again with other foil in the same manner at all times.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as shown in these tied examples:
And when it happens that a tooth or two are knocked back into their places by falling into them, and they have been restored as we have recommended, but still remain damaged.
This is not done except by skilled and wise craftsmen.
Sometimes it happens that the bones of cattle are used for this purpose, and they are made in the shape of teeth and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and they are pressed as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV
On the incision of the frenulum that comes on the tongue and impedes speech
This frenulum which attaches to the bottom of the tongue sometimes occurs naturally in some people or appears accidentally due to scar tissue that has already hardened.
The operation in this case is that the mouth of the patient be opened wide with the head held back, and then the tongue is lifted up and the frenulum is incised along its length until the tongue is released from its attachment.
But if there is some hardness or firmness in that place due to scar tissue from an injury, then apply some oil and incise it along its length until you have completely cut through the frenulum and the firmness has been released.
But be careful not to make a deep cut in the skin of the front of the tongue, otherwise you may inadvertently injure an artery and cause bleeding.
And then rinse the area of the incision with warm water or vinegar or hot water, and then apply a clean linen cloth to the bottom of the tongue. Then have the patient hold it there for several nights so that it does not become attached again in the future.
But if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area. But if the bleeding continues, then cauterize it with a silver cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV
Extraction of a ranula from under the tongue
Sometimes, swellings resembling small tumors form underneath the tongue and prevent it from functioning properly.
The operation involves opening the patient's mouth widely and examining the swelling under the tongue
If you find it of dark or black color, hard, without the patient feeling pain, then do not touch that area as it is cancerous
If it appears white and wet, then insert a needle into it and cut through that thin saliva with scissors, cutting all the way through. If blood starts to flow during your operation, stop for a moment until the bleeding subsides, which is called cauterization
Then return to your work until you have completely finished it, washing the area with vinegar and salt water, and treat it with the other appropriate cure until it is healed
CHAPTER XXXVI.
On the extraction of swellings from both ears and those that appear on the scrotum, as well as other swellings.
When there is an inflammation in the groin, it are glands that gather together at times. These may occur externally and are called "two ears". If you treat them with what we said in the division (i.e., the previous treatment) but they do not heal, then consider if the boil is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive to touch; if so, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Instead, allow it to ripen on its own, and once it has matured, you will either remove it or it will burst open on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then that one should be incised.
And the operation on it is this: before your operation, consider if the boil has already rested and is completely calm or if it has diminished somewhat. Then make an incision in front of the sun, with the head of it towards you and open its mouth, and have the servant hold the patient's tongue from behind using a noble instrument whose shape is like this:
"Let it be made of silver or of brass, and let it be thin as a razor."
"Therefore when you press upon that with your tongue and it reveals the ulcer, immediately grab it with forceps at its base, then take a needle and insert it there, pulling it outward as far as possible." "And after removing some of the clothing, you must proceed to cut into it with this tool which has this form:"
"And after removing some of the clothing, you must proceed to cut into it with this tool which has this form:" "It is similar to forceps, but its outer ends are curved so that the tips of each are facing towards the other and very sharp, made of tempered iron."
"But if this tool is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula whose shape is like this: sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And after cutting one opening, cut another according to this same method of incision, and then wash the wound out with plenty of water."
"But if there is bleeding, wash with water from a decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves, which are similar to those causes that stop bleeding, until the bleeding stops, and then dress it until it heals."
"And sometimes, in the groin area or other parts of the body, there appear other tumors besides those two which I have mentioned for incision."
"And once I treated a woman who had an abscess that was born in her groin area, which tended towards a dark color and was insensitive. The wound had already closed over, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, eating and drinking were prohibited to her, and she would have died within two days if not for my care."
"And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed out through two holes on either side of her genitals."
"I then approached him surgically and placed myself in one of his openings, and drew out that which was there, a large portion having been expelled. Immediately afterwards I inserted it into another opening nearby, and immediately afterward I opened his mouth and pressed down on his tongue. Then I placed the opening back onto that aposteme."
"And you cut off a large part of him, from which only a little blood flowed." "Then the woman recovered from that illness. She began to drink water immediately and also took food. And I continued to incise that aposteme many times over a long period of time. And it healed little by little in its place, and the incision remained open as it prolonged itself."
"Then I went away and cauterized the wound of him. And thereafter, nothing more happened. And I wandered around and did not know what God had done for that reason regarding me."
Chapter XXXVII
"Of Incising a Swelling When It is Apostematous"
"If cataracts come to the swelling and it becomes apostematous and elongated, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is thick and round at its beginning, then it is called bubble."
"But when it is cured with what we have said in the division and its cure does not confirm itself, and especially many times when an aposteme that has been cauterized already remains and becomes subtle, then it is necessary for you to incise that which is gathered round; and if it is at that length, and it is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and there is no sensation in it, then it is necessary for you to hesitate about the incision of it, because there is fear concerning the illness."
"And when you find it according to the manner that I have told you of its whiteness and length, then make sure of the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument which processes its shape, and hold the onion in the new one, and pull that downwards and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two molluscs."
"And it is necessary that you do not incise it except what is appropriate to the natural term without addition, because if you incise more of it, you will diminish its speech."
"And moreover concerning the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two molluscs, and cure it within so that it may be healed."
"But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then it is necessary for you to use cautery in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery on it is not except with hot water, and this is what you should do: hold the head of the illness in its right side, and moreover press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and moreover take some of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that live cause, and pause it neither thick nor subtle, and from there fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:"
"So that the extremity of it may be concave where the medicine is paused just like the concavity of a spoon of ray, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the valve, and let the illness lean on its left side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one falls through the internal medicine, because in this way none of it will fall into its throat and it will escape."
"And moreover put your hand on the medicine, and press it on the uvula for half an hour until you see that it is darkened and sedated by the biting of the medicine."
"And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula of above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want concerning the cautery of the grape, and moreover leave that because it will dry up and fall after about three or four days."
"And if you need to repeat the medicine, then repeat it. And moreover concerning cautery, wash around the grape with cotton dipped in borax, and cleanse that which is around it of the medicine, and be washed with hot water, and be cared for afterwards with embrocation, and finally with fomentations until it may be healed."
"And this kind of cure was kept safe because incision was very long ago due to fear."
"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something that is more subtle than cautery and incision because it is cured with sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron Arabic, chamomile, brotus, and similar herbs of those kinds, and prepare all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and immerse them in sour wine, and boil it; and the bowl should be well covered with dough properly prepared, and there should be a hole made in the middle of the bowl on which an instrument concave of silver is placed according to this manner: it should be made of silver or brass."
"And immerse the extremity into the mouth of the illness until the vapor may reach the uvula on the palate until the uvula is moistened."
"And moreover repeat this many times until it is dry. And take care that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the formation of abscesses because it would fit too tightly against the abscess and you should not do this but rather declare the cauterization of its abscess."
"But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and make a cap of wool at its extremity so that the mouth of the illness may be covered because the cap of wool prevents the vapor from burning the mouth."
"And this cure is good for health."
"Chapter XXXVI."
Of extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the throat and of other causes.
Many times a splinter of wood or bone or some other cause may adhere in the throat."
Then you must extract that which is apparent of those things, on which the sight falls because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat."
"And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the ill person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach because the cause adhering to the throat will be extracted by vomiting; or if the ill person swallows a piece of soap or of radish or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge dried well and tie it tightly with string, and moreover make the ill person swallow that because when it reaches the place where its splinters are located, then they will be extracted." "And moreover take an eel and tie it with string well, and let it be dried afterwards and cautiously extracted; or take a rod and cautiously insert it and cautiously withdraw it."
"But if they are not extracted with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:"
"And let it be thicker than a small ray, and at the extremity of it there should be concavity which you insert into its throat with ease."
"And make him raise his head upwards, and take care that the touch of his os of the throat does not happen because it would cause pain to him or with that which peels off the bone or splinter, or what that physician touches with his hand."
"But however the ill person himself should insert it better because of his knowledge of the place where the cause is adhering and peeling off in order to extract it downwards and draw out his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared beforehand so that it may be extracted."
Capital thirty-nine
On removing an appendage attached to the caecum
When applying medicinal leeches according to what we have mentioned in the division of cures with medications and they do not improve, consider the time of day when examining the patient's abdomen, because you have prepared the tongue of the instrument which has been recommended.
Therefore if you apply the leech, remove it with gentle pressure or with subtle gestures appropriately
And if you are unable to remove it in this way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's abdomen, and properly place a red-hot iron wire within the concavity of the cannula, repeating this until the leech is dead and removed from the abdomen. Abstain from giving water to the patient all day long.
And take a vessel full of water and heat it up, and place the mouth of the patient in that vessel and wash out their mouth with it. And do not let any of that water flow back into the vessel or else rinse your hand once again in the water after an hour has passed, because the leech immediately feels the water coming
But if this is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and it will be done quickly.
And another way of operating in the fumigation of that part is to take an earthen pot containing hot coals and cover it with a lid which has a hole in its middle, placing the end of the instrument in this hole. Then begin the fumigation with incense or asafoetida using the instrument. Have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula and hold their mouth tightly shut so that no smoke escapes until you are sure that the smoke has reached the leech, because the leech will immediately fall off.
And if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times and have the patient refrain from drinking water. They should eat salted foods and also drink wine, and this regimen must not be forgotten.
And here is the shape of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the pharynx when it is seen; it resembles forceps like this: but it has some curvature in it and which is placed in the pharynx. The end of it resembles the bill of an ibis, and it is slightly hooked at its tip, so that when it grasps something, it will not let go.
Chapter XL
In this chapter is the sum of our discourse on the opening of abscesses and their incision.
"Abscesses are many kinds of growths, having many appearances, according to how they appear in memory, each described in this book."
"And their perforations and sections differ from one another in two ways: the first is that they are all specific to abscesses themselves; and the second is due to their humidity."
"And the second way is according to the locations in which they occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy location differs from one at a joint; each having its own treatment through surgery."
"More about abscesses: some should not be punctured, but rather waited until their ripeness or completion."
"Other abscesses that should be drained when they are hard and not yet ripe according to their completion include those near joints. Because an abscess near a joint prolongs its being into the surrounding area and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb. Or it is near a main member, and if you delay its puncture until it is fully ripened, it may harm the main member. Or it is near the anus, so puncture only one that has not yet broken through to prevent prolapse of its contents into the intestines and the creation of a fistula." "It is important that you know the right time to drain an abscess, which is when it has ripened."
"And know that an abscess has ripened when there is a decrease in pain and the cessation of fever, along with a decrease in heat and pulsation, a point at which the head of the abscess becomes more distinct, and other signs."
"And it is necessary that you know how to drain an abscess in its central part, avoiding the edges of the abscess and any pus that may have formed during healing."
"And always drain an abscess through the length of the flesh or skin if it is in the areas of the thigh or buttocks and near tendons, nerves, arteries, and other locations where there is reflection. Use drainage according to that particular member for reflected areas."
"But when the abscess is in fatty tissue, it is better to delay drainage until digestion is complete as we have said. Otherwise, the opening will be prolonged, filled with much pus, and its lips may become hardened and its depth increased."
"But some abscesses should be drained according to the width of the flesh or skin as necessary, or according to what that particular member requires."
"And you should make a small incision for smaller abscesses, and a larger one with many sections according to the size of larger abscesses."
"And there are other abscesses in which the incision should be curved and made when the opening is in its final stage, just like those found in the groin and inguinal region."
"And of those that are incised with three angles, and of those that are incised like the figure of a mitre leaf, as in the case of hip joint abscesses."
"And there are others where a round or crescent-shaped incision is made, similar to those."
"But for those abscesses that do not behave like the usual ones, you should perform a superficial or horizontal incision only."
"And when an abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should drain it but not try to remove all the pus at once. Remove a portion first, then pack the abscess cavity with gauze on the following day, removing more pus each time until it is completely drained."
"And especially if the patient is a frail person, woman in labor, child, or elderly person in decline. For in many cases, vital spirits are exhausted by the discharge of pus, and the patient may die during surgery."
"So be careful with this chapter and when you perform an incision on these abscesses, clean the edges and consider whether the wound is narrow or flat. If it is narrow, use catgut sutures; if it is large and the incisions are extensive, pause between each pull until they close together."
"And if a portion of the wall or curved part of an abscess is removed during drainage, you should close it with silk thread or catgut sutures as when sewing a wound without moisture. Strengthen it on the third day and then proceed to treat it according to what is necessary for wounds until healed."
"But if bleeding occurs during your operation, you should apply a compress of cold water and vinegar on which you have placed a linen cloth, pressing it firmly on the bleeding site for several times."
"But if bleeding persists, you should apply dressings and treatment as well as powders recommended in many places throughout this book."
"But if it is wintertime and the abscess is in an area with many nerves, you should apply powders made of wine and hot oil, pressing them on the location."
"And if it is summer and the location is fatty, you should apply powders made with cold water and oil or wine and oil, rubbing them in until the third day as we have said. Then open the abscess, clean it, and treat it according to what is appropriate for that particular case until healed."
"And this is what is generally necessary for the treatment of abscesses, but according to the method of distinction, I have already explained in previous chapters how each type of abscess should be treated individually."
Chapter XLII
Of Incising Abscesses that Appear on the Neck
In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear and these are of the type known as knots containing tunics that are formed there. These types are many.
"And of these are painted, those that contain moisture similar to lime." "And of those which contain moisture resembling dust, and similar to them; and of those which are stony, hard."
"And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, for their extraction does not cause any injury to the bowel."
"And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument shaped like this," [diagram], "which is called 'entromes', until you see that it contains."
"If what it contains is moisture, then cut it with a section along its length through a superficial section in this shape:"
"And begin at the section of line B towards line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you remove that which contains that moisture and do not leave it with any cause of death, for if there remains any cause it will return to life."
"And immediately immerse it in Egyptian pitch if available, and if not, in water and salt. Fill it with that and leave it for another day, for with this you will corrode everything which remains of that skin."
"And again apply that ointment to the wound with Egyptian pitch a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed."
"And if an aposteme contains fatty nodes, then cut it in this shape:" "With a section having the form of a cross, and cut it once between its two lips and scrape it from top to bottom, and apply your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it."
"But if you are not successful with this method, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly do with the lapidated aposteme with its section and cure according to what we have told you; and the section on the lapidated aposteme is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
"And sometimes there are some of these apostemes which are on the head in some men who are completely dry; and this is because once I cut an aposteme on the head of an old woman and it appeared like deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if someone were struck with that they would become ill."
"But in other accidental apostemes on the head which are not like this, such as those that come to the heads of children and arise from the roots of the ears, but their section should be a superficial section."
"And pause the perforation of those from below because it is low down there, for fear that it may harm the body's health at its lowest parts."
"And then dress them with what is appropriate for their cure."
Chapter XLII.
Of the section of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, armpits, and anus; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are often caused by the blockage of the pores between them. All scrofula from these is within its own skin, and so it is with the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have explained.
And the types of these scrofula are many: some are hard and stony, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not yield to treatment.
Therefore, in that which you find to be of good disposition upon examination, whose color is closest to that of flesh and which extends throughout the entire part without being adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to the veins nor to the skin, it should be incised with a dry superficial cut from above downwards across the body between lines G and B. Then spread apart the lips of the wound with forceps or many forceps if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And take care that neither vein nor nerve be incised.
"Even if the wound does not seem to be deep enough for your hand to fit into it without hurting the patient, or if it is not necessary to incise further; however, if you happen to cut a vein or artery and prevent its flow, then apply a plaster of vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding, squeeze the wound, remove what rests, and let the wound heal naturally until inflammation subsides." "When blood is absorbed."
"And then return to your operation once you have completed it."
"And accordingly, ask if any cause of the other small sores is broken; then incise those and clean them."
"But if it is in the region of a large vein, do not incise that sore from its root." "Press with a folded cloth soaked in hot water and let it rest until it falls by itself without causing harm."
"And then fill the wound with cotton wool which you have already softened in Egyptian ointment, and dress it accordingly."
"And if you incise the entire sore, then be sure to approximate both lips of the wound and dress it immediately so that there is no remaining surplus."
"But if you find that there is surplus due to the size of the sore, then you must incise its root and extract it, administer sutures, and do whatever is prescribed."
"And regarding those sores that contain moisture, perforate them with a superficial perforation here where the head of the sore appears and let it drain whatever pus there may be under the skin, as we have said."
"And then administer perforation; dress with ointment and similar materials to burn away what remains of the corruption." "And when you see that the wound is clean, then dress it with ointment made from hare's fat until it heals."
**Chapter XLIII.**
**Of the Incision of the Point of the Accidental Abscess in the Throat.**
"The ancients called this section 'in epilepsy,' and we have not seen anyone in our land who has had it done."
"And this is the inscription of their speech."
"But in men with epilepsy, care should be taken to avoid extracting the epilhot, because this would not bring about a cure as all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here."
"But in those who have scars from cauterization on the mouth or ear or two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, care should be taken to avoid the section of epilhot so as to flee the damage which is done by forceps."
"So therefore when we wish this, let us incise the epilhot from three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitut in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the section be in the bone, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for sectioning because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from its son are removed."
"And if the physician is afraid, then let him extend the ear canal with one hand and properly incise the canal until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if he sees any cause."
"And then incise the epilhot according to what we have recommended, and this is indicated about the section of the canal by that membrane which is of its issue with that which is of its discordance and by the absence of voice."
"Then leave the wound open for some time."
"So when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, then attach two lips of the ear canal wound, and let that alone be the cartilage."
"And then administer medications that cause flesh to grow so that it may be healed."
"And Albucasis says that the sum of this speech which we have recommended is no other than this: that some of these abscesses have already closed the ear canal of the patient and the illness has come within to death, and the air of it has been cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe on the location of the wound for some respiration, and thus be saved from death."
"And therefore I command you to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed. And the malice is for three days. And therefore I command you to close the wound after that time, and heal it until it be healed."
"And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a certain woman took a knife and inserted it into her ear canal and incised one part of the auditory meatus, and I was called to heal her. And I found her like one dead in mourning, and I discovered the wound and wiped away the blood which had issued from it."
"So I was convinced that she had not incised any vein or artery, and the wind issued from the wound, and I healed it until it be healed."
"And do not chide that woman if she did not raise her voice, and soon after some days return to the improvement of her disposition."
"And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis."
"Chapter XLIV"
"Of incision upon an abscess which occurs externally on the ear canal, and is called a herniation of the ear."
"This abscess called herniation of the ear is a large abscess according to the color of the flesh, and it is common in women."
"And it occurs in two ways, for either it is natural or accidental."
"And in the natural one there is no means of curing it."
"And the accidental one occurs in two ways, of which one is similar to fat knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by a knot of an artery, and in that there is danger." "And it should not be presumed upon with iron except in that which is small." "Then press upon it and examine it with the finger, and if you find it similar to fat knots, and not suspended on any of the veins, then incise it like nodes, and extract that which contains it from the skin and bursa. And otherwise, then carefully inspect its entire being, and then cure the location with whatever is necessary for healing until it be healed."
"Chapter XLIV"
"Of incision of kinds of knots."
"There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division."
"And it is necessary that you explain thus the difference between a knot and an extrudate when there is doubt."
"Therefore I say that with an extrudate there is heat and fever and severe pain until the ebullition of the superfeta is sedated. And it is complete putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat."
"But with a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain. And it contains a cicada lion which is in its proper sac."
"And it is according to the color of the flesh. And its beginning is like a flea and it becomes like an empty bag, whether large or small. And they are of two kinds: either fat and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division."
"Therefore, when you arrive at the healing of a knot, it is necessary to examine that and investigate it at its beginning with an instrument called an intromes, according to what will come later in the chapter which is next."
"And this is the method of investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: take this instrument and insert it into the moist place which you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the channel."
"And then lastly close your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess. And then extract the intromes and consider what is issued in its track."
"If it is a forgotten moisture of whatever color, then incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in the other abscesses."
"But if there is no moisture issued from the track of the intromes, then you know that it is fat."
"And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross in this manner:" "Thus as I have shown you. And suspend it with forceps and cut the channel from every side easily, keeping the skin or sac intact if possible. And then extract that which contains the knot."
"But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that which contains it intact. And often you will find such things there, and then extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it."
"For if anything remains of it, a little or much, the knot returns according to its nature."
"And if you see that some small part remains of it, then complete the wound with a poultice of some caustic powders and strengthen the poultice. And pause upon that which sedates an abscess cauterization, and cure it with the other healing methods until it is healed."
"But if it is a large knot, then cut both lips of it and heal it with whatever is appropriate."
"But if a pulsatile vein is present on the contrary side, or non-pulsatile, then cover and dress the wound with threefold zigzag stitching which is called catgut and leave it alone for two days or three until the poultice has dried and the boiling of the blood has ceased. And then return to incising what remains of the knot."
"Chapter XLVI"
"Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for sectioning and perforation."
"The forms of those instruments are three kinds: some are large, others medium-sized, and others small."
"The form of the large instrument is as follows:"
"The form of the small instrument is as follows:"
"Let them be made of iron, flat and pointed at the end appropriately, so that they may easily enter into the ulcers."
"And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are called albereds, and one of them is called a beroid."
"And there are three kinds: large, medium, and few."
"The form of the large experiment is as follows:"
"The form of the medium-sized experiment is as follows:"
"The form of the few experiments is as follows:"
"It is convenient that they be used for those ulcers, fistulae and buboes, so that among these are some of the bones and others of other causes."
"And there are made redonts, large and pointed, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrine or brass or iron or silver. And the best ones are those made of citrine."
"And the experiments of black feathers are made, which should be used to open those fistulae in whose concavity there are reflections, and they should be reflected back with their own weight upon those reflections."
"And there are three kinds: some of them are long, others medium, and still others short, depending on the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stenosis."
"The form of the large lead experiment is as follows:"
"The form of the medium-sized lead experiment is as follows:"
"The form of the small lead experiment is as follows:"
"The forms of hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple, having only one curvature, and there are three kinds: large, few, and medium-sized."
"And among them there are hooked forceps, which come in three kinds."
"Among those hooks there are some with two curvatures, which come in three kinds:"
"And among them there are some with three curvatures, which also come in three kinds."
"And all these are necessary in their place."
"The form of the small simple hook is as follows:"
"The form of the large hook with two curvatures is as follows:" "The form of the medium-sized hook with two curvatures is as follows:" "The form of the small hook with two curvatures is as follows:"
"The form of the large hook with three curvatures is as follows:"
"The form of the medium-sized hook with three curvatures is as follows:"
"And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the knots and pusules are cut and scraped, and they come in three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small."
"The form of the large scalpel is as follows:"
"The form of the medium-sized scalpel is as follows:"
"The form of the small scalpel is as follows:"
"The extremities of these with which the section is made are sharp and the others are not sharp, but this is not done in such a manner that there may be fear of cutting veins or nerves, and so that the disease may be cured and tranquility obtained by the cauterization that follows the scraping of the pusule."
"And these are the forms of spatulas, which come in three kinds: large, medium-sized and small, as you can see."
"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which aloe is made."
"And it has a pierced extremity with a hidden spatula and in that part there are openings both inside and outside, as you see."
"The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the aforementioned ones during the perforation of pusules and do not hurt the patient, come in three kinds: large, medium-sized and small." "And these are the forms of them:"
"The forms of forceps used to remove blood flow, which come in three kinds: large, medium and small. The forms are as follows:"
"They are made of citrus iron, rounded with some length, and they are thin."
"And it is necessary that these kinds of forceps be large, medium-sized and small, so that by means of them blood flow can be removed quickly when needed, and also when first aid is administered."
"But do not use these forceps to remove blood from any part of the body, except for fatty areas, such as the armpits and groin, the inner arm, the breasts, the abdomen, the thighs, and similar moist fatty areas."
"And sometimes these instruments are made into small ones resembling fishhooks according to this form; with which blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy or cutting of vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round like this:"
"Chapter XLVI."
"The care of men's breasts which are like those of women."
"Some men's breasts become swollen at the onset of sleep and they are also large like those of women, and prominent."
"And whoever does this should make an incision through the crescent moon-shaped mark according to this pattern, from line B to line G, then remove all the thickness and fill it with a medicine-soaked bandage, then stitch together the two lips of the wound and heal it until it is healed."
"But if the breast droops downwards and is softened by its size like that of women, then it should be cut in two on both sides above, with two incisions resembling a crescent moon figure, each contained within the other at the end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this pattern: line B and line G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, drain the pus, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed."
"And if you do not make the incision that is necessary due to the discomfort of the illness and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive oil and let it corrode what needs to be corroded from its thickness, and then heal that wound until it is healed."
Chapter XLVIII
Of the perforation of boils that come out on the thighs.
These boils that appear on the thighs are of the species called scrofula, hard ones which contain a kernel that is squeezed out.
And those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent moon-shaped section according to this pattern: from line G to line B. And when all the unhealthy matter has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it alone until the next day.
And then remove the cotton wool and heal it with an appropriate ointment for it until it is healed.
And if the boil is of the species called knots and scrofula, then incise it just as we have said in the section about scrofula, but slightly deeper.
But if the wound is extended so much that it leaves a scar, then apply cautery according to what we have said earlier.
Chapter XLIX
Cutting of boils that occur through injury or veins
When an artery is broken and the blood vessels are closed above it, many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and gathered in the chest; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel that there is a stridor (noise) in it.
And that which is due to a vein is round at the surface of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is an error, especially in those that are on the left side of the armpits, in the angles of the ribs, and near the neck and many other parts of the body. And if it is large, then its cure with iron should be avoided, but if it is on the outer edge or on the head, then it should be avoided as well.
But on that which is due to inflammation of the wall of the artery, cutting into it in the thigh makes a long incision. And then widen the incision with hooks and approximate the artery, and strip away the tunics around it so that it is exposed.
And now carefully place that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the bowstring with doubled thread in two places, which causes you to have better sight for the extraction of two bowstrings which are in the temples.
And now carefully cut the space between two ligaments with a scalpel so that all the blood comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
And now apply treatment in which power is generated so that the ligaments fall; and also treat it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand that which is near the abscess with tweezers, and carefully insert the needle from the side where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and with that thread doubled you should extract it from the other side, and also ligate the abscess with good linen according to what I have told you in the linen of grapes of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the needle with its eye through all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and stretch your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle part until it is completely dried out, and then cut off the excess of the thread, leaving only what is needed.
And then sprinkle powder on it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and apply treatment with compresses and remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to torsion of nerves.
Thus just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive exertion, and for similar reasons.
And it happens most often in the locations of the elbows or ankles, or in any place where joints are moved awkwardly.
And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body, and it occurs in the larger joints without their movement when they are pressed with great force, causing pain like stupor.
And it is not an abscess that appears on the front of the body, but rather on its side, and it moves to all parts and does not go before nor behind.
Therefore, those that occur in joints need not be treated with iron because this would cause severe contraction.
But those that appear on the head or forehead should have the thread removed with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then you can treat it with cupping glasses and cut it open with razors.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, excise it, and remove it; and then sew it up with stitches, treating it until it heals.
Chapter 2
On the incision of an abscess that occurs due to cholelithiasis in the abdomen.
There are many veins visible in the abdomens of those people and in other parts of their bodies which are called "fungual" due to their similarity to funguses, from which the razor is subtle but its head is large. And some have their lips turned inward, and these are small or greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one such case, in which there were two parts in his abdomen that resembled funguses, and there was no difference between them, with small razors.
And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Therefore, I cut into them and removed from the one 18 ounces and from the other 6 ounces.
"And the operation on the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of their skin is white, humid, of subtle nature. Then you make the incision with a wide scalpel, and have cauteries in your presence in the fire, for many times it happens that much blood is expelled from the section of him/her; and if blood comes to you, cauterize that."
"And if the patient is pale and afraid, beware of making an incision with iron. But then take fresh lead filings, and place them on that skin, in the manner which we have said. And leave it for two days."
"And precisely adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore do not cease pressing the lead until it is cut off and falls away by itself."
"But if that skin is of thick nature, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and trembling, especially in that which is in the belly."
"But it is possible for you to incise the middle of it, and precisely cauterize it so that it does not return."
"And also care for it until the wound has healed."
"And beware that you do not presume to incise skin which is of dark color, insensitive, and carefully guarded, for that is affected by cancer."
"And here comes the memory of cancer."
"Chapter 52"
"On the treatment of prominence of the navel."
"Prominence of the navel is caused by several reasons: either through fissures in the skin which is above the belly, or through tissue or bowel protruding due to other ruptures; or through blood flowing from veins or arteries depending on what was previously mentioned; or through constricted wind in it."
"If the cause is a fissure of the skin and tissue swelling, then the color of the boil resembles that of the body; it has no pain, and appears in various places." "And if it is due to bowel protrusion, then the location of that is with much greater variation than what we have described above. When you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and quickly returns. It produces a loud sound and has a large entrance for bath water which causes vigorous movement."
"But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it does not disappear when you press on it with your hand; it is neither narrowed nor enlarged."
"And if it is due to blood, then the boil appears with these symptoms and has a declining black color."
"But if it is due to raw flesh, then the boil is heavy, thick, hard, and sinks according to its quantity."
"But if it is due to windiness, then touching it causes pain."
"And the operation for this is that you should consider now whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness. Therefore, you should refrain from treating it because there is fear and trepidation about this, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about boils caused by arteries and veins."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to bowel or tissue, then you should order the patient to lie on their back with their arms extended. Then, make a sign with your finger around the entire navel area and immediately command them to keep their hands behind their back while lying prone on their belly. Next, use a wide spatula in a circular motion around the navel where you have indicated with your finger. Then, extend the head of the boil upwards using a large probe. Finally, tie it tightly with strong thread or waxed linen using an appropriate tying method."
"And then grasp the middle of the boil and extend it upwards over the intestinal ligament. Insert your little finger into that opening and search for the bowel; if you find it and grab it with the ligament, then carefully pull it out and push the bowel back inside the abdomen."
"And if you have grabbed the tissue, then take hold of it with a probe and cut away any excess tissue from it."
"But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Then, take two needles and insert strong threads into them. Insert the needles into the area you have made around the boil in a cross-like manner, making sure they penetrate well. Then, stretch the boil in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched skin to fall back on its own. Or cut where it has become thinner and can be easily removed. Then, dress the wound with whatever is appropriate until it heals."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to fat or moisture, then you should cut away the boil as we have described and remove the blood or moisture that you find there. Then, dress the wound with whatever is appropriate and allow it to heal."
Chapter LIII
"On the treatment of cancer."
"As we have said, in the division of species of cancer and its manner of approach to cure with medicines, and that surgery is an escape from its cure lest it be ulcerated; we have spoken of cancer generated in the breast and caution in its cure."
"And they said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, as with the cancer that is in the breasts or in the thigh, and their opinion was to remove all of it, especially when it is beginning small."
"But when cancer is old and severe, do not try to approach it because you will not be able to heal that ulcer nor have I seen another one, nor has anyone else."
"And the operation on cancer is what we have described: that you first relieve the patient and purge them of black bile sometimes, and then cut away that part if it shows clear swelling."
"And prepare the patient with preparation where the operation is located, and then prohibit certain foods that are harmful to them. And also cleanse all parts of the wound with good care so that there is no remaining cause of the return of cancer." "And let blood flow freely, and do not bandage it lightly, and press the wound areas, and wipe away thick blood either with your hand or with an instrument that you have available among the instruments."
"But if there is heavy bleeding from an incision in a vein or artery, then cauterize that spot until the flow of blood has stopped, and then treat it with other treatment until it heals."
"Chapter 54."
"On the Treatment of Hydrops."
"We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops of water and the signs of each type, along with their treatments using medicines."
"And that which is cured by iron alone is but the species of ulcers, and it is not approached with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hippocephali, for this is mortal."
"And when you have treated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, then consider whether the patient has already achieved mastery over this disease or if it is another type of dropsy such as that found in the throat or intestines. Be careful not to treat them with iron for there is fear involved here."
"But if the patient's condition is one of excessive virtue and in it there is no other disease besides dropsy alone, not infantile nor senile, then the manner of performing this operation is as follows: lift the patient between your thighs and have a servant press his abdomen with their hand, expelling water from below through the penis. Then take a sharp-bladed instrument..."
"...let it be two-sided and pointed at both ends like a spatula, but let there also be some shortening towards the middle, so that in performing this operation you do not penetrate too deeply into the bladder and thus harm it."
"And also consider if the dropsy is due to an obstruction of the bladder, for in that case you should make your incision three fingerbreadths away from the navel on the right side towards the pubic region."
"But if the dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel at a distance of three fingerbreadths."
"And if the dropsy is due to disease of the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
"And do not make your incision on the side where you want the disease to flow out, so that the superfluities do not flow there."
"And then perforate the entire canal with the instrument and insert it into the incision. Then elevate your hand with the spatula between the canal and the siphon, and excise that; if the quantity is about a fingernail or an ell."
"And then pierce the siphon within so that the spatula reaches the desired place, which is where the water is." "And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:" "And it is similar to a cannula of thin silver; it is made of silver or brass or laton lion, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. And the tip of it is cut like a feather, thus:"
"And at the upper end there is an opening, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately it will draw that towards itself, and thus evacuate as much water from the middle ear as necessary. For if you evacuate too much of that at once, it can cause sudden death due to the dissolution of its animal spirit, or it can cause a syncope that is near death."
"But evacuate according to the quantity of its strength, and also consider the dispositions of the disease, the virtue of the pulse, and the condition of the patient."
"And then remove the instrument and retain the water that causes it, for immediately it is retained by the canal which retains the hole that you are commanded to pierce in that manner."
"And then iterate the instrument on another day if the disease is tolerating it, and extract a small quantity of water. Do this for several days with caution, taking care that only a little water remains."
"But if you fear for the patient and have let out a large quantity of water, then cure him with embrocation in hot sand, fomentations with saltwater baths, and expose him to the sun for a long time. And cure him also with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize over the stomach, spleen and liver immediately after the extraction of the water, according to what has been said before."
Chapter Lv.
On the treatment of children born with imperforate openings for urine.
"Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is drawn tight or not in its place)."
"Therefore, it is necessary to cut immediately after birth with a sharp knife according to this method:"
"And first tie around the cord with a thin lead clamp and ligate it, then wait for three days or four."
"When they want to urinate, they should be moved away from the bed and return afterwards."
"And if you do not use lead, it is possible that urine will flow over the place and close this wound."
"But those whose cord is drawn tight should be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it becomes wider."
"However, those whose cord is not in its place are called 'leditz', the cause of which is that those who are born with the cord around the neck cannot urinate downwards until they lift the cord upwards by hand; this is not their natural condition because sperm cannot reach the mother rectally, and it is a serious illness."
"And the way to operate in this case is for the sick person to lie on his back, then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the tip of the glans penis with a sharp knife like cutting a feather, taking care not to cut any part of it, so that the meatus appears like the head of the penis and the cord falls into its proper place as needed."
"And be careful in your operation for a flow of blood, because many times it happens this way; pause at the bleeding with what you have cut off and treat the wound until it is healed."
"Chapter .56"
"About the whitening that occurs on the foreskin of the penis, which is characterized by inflammation and blackness, along with adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis."
"Often seen in the penis and its fleshy prominence."
"And among them, one is malignant and another is non-malignant."
"Non-malignant: you should suspend with a thin hook and cut it out cleanly; then apply pressure on the wound using Egyptian gauze; and finally cure it with a fine ointment until healed."
"And if the whitening is malignant and of dark color, you should apply cautery around its opening and root."
"But if the whitening is on the foreskin of the non-circumcised penis, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, you should remove the whitening that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then you should treat the outside, because if you treat both together with the foreskin, it may become trapped."
"And similarly, occurrences happen in the groins and blackened foreskin with decay, therefore you should remove all that which has already darkened or is about to decay or has already decayed; then apply a line of this over it, made from honey mixed with ground barley flour, wormwood powder and sieved."
"And apply the other treatment until it is healed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then perform cautery with a Lunar knife according to this form:"
"because cauterizing with a lunar knife is done in two positions at once, both for the flow of blood and for the gangrene when it is corrupted."
"And if the head of the penis is eaten away and completely destroyed in one hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the urine may pass through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those who are uncircumcised, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to gangrene or an abscess), you should use a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides."
"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut with a spatula a little from the head of the penis and foreskin, because this is done in order that the foreskin, being subtle, may be pierced lightly through its thinness."
"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis using a thread of fine silk, which has been boiled in water so that it may not adhere again."
"And then treat with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter LXVIII."
"Of the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision."
"Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other gangrenes: but since it is of our operation and will, and its proper use is in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the better operation and easier way for preserving health."
"Therefore I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a knife and with tweezers; and they use liniment with pitch and perform incision with the nail."
"And I have already proven all these methods and did not find better cleansing with forceps, with liniment made of pitch for cleansing done with the nail because many times it causes the cord to break from above, because the foreskin has two tunics and the inner one remains and it is often necessary to perform another incision with pain." "And in cleansing done with alphecates, which is digital and used by barbers, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secure because it often enters the urethra."
"But in operation done with a nail, you often cut with iron and corrupt your operation." "And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it hangs in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, as I have seen."
"But as for the cleansing done with forceps and liniment made of pitch, I have found by experience that the goodness of these forceps is that they cut proportionally because the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand so proportionately with two sharp points, you will cut according to one comparison in a single time, and there is compression of the pitch made in such a way as to contain the foreskin completely without any error."
"And the first manner of operation is that you should have the child lie on his back if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not place the pitch on his penis unless you leave him like that for another day."
"And then make him laugh in any way possible so that he may receive his understanding." "And then have him lie between your thighs in such a way that he is not frightened, and hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear so that the child does not see them nor anyone else among the instruments."
"And then insert your hand into his penis and blow on the foreskin, pulling it until it covers the head of the penis, and then cleanse that with whatever dirt has gathered there."
"The shape of the forceps used for cleansing is as follows:"
"The outer edges of the forceps should not be cut and the inner ones should be sharp so that the edge of the blade is not exposed, and the length of the two points should be equal to the length of the two handles when opened."
"But the error in cleansing is that sometimes you remove the inner foreskin entirely or partially where it should be cut."
"Therefore, you must stretch it at your leisure with your nail in front of the swelling and cut according to equality."
"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut it."
"But if three days have passed and there remains what is inflamed below the penis, then you should leave it until the swelling has subsided, cut it with ease, and cut it according to your preparation."
"And be careful of the head of the penis, for nothing should harm it."
"And then treat him with whatever plaster will consolidate from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
"If it is cut to measure and you obey the instructions above, nothing will happen to him."
"And let he who has this be healed as we have said."
I will not translate that sentence since it's a chapter number in English. The correct translation would be "Chapter LVII" or "Chapter Fifty-Seven".
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to stone or concretion, or by poultice or flesh, and it seems like those mentioned above that we have described regarding the methods of treatment in this division.
And if it is not dissolved even with what we have said and the cause of the illness is violent, then extraction must be performed using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and thin like a reed quill, about as long as half a palm, at whose end there should be a thin tube.
And the manner of performing evacuation of urine using this is as follows: Take a doubled feather and insert its tip into the tube of the syringe, tied securely with linen or cotton; if there is any superfluous flesh from the skin around it, remove it with forceps, then insert the linen or cotton into the tube with violence. Then attach the syringe to the wall and place it on the edge of a bowl filled with warm water.
And make the patient lie on their side, and insert the syringe into the bladder through the urethra using olive oil and warm water.
Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the penis; then bend the penis upward at the point where it joins the belly; then push the syringe inward through that; then push it further until it reaches the bladder and causes relief from the illness. But if this is not done according to this order, but rather as something twisted, then there may be harm.
Then gradually expand the tube with linen or cotton, because urine follows the linen.
Approach carefully that one and perform cupping therapy with urine, using a cautery, do not cease until it is evacuated from the bladder and the ailment has improved.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
"Regarding the quality of cleansing the bladder using a funnel and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose."
"When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood is congested there, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you wish to drain water and medicines into it at that time, use an instrument called a funnel, which has this shape:"
"However, its outer end is not pointed, but rounded and closed." "And it has three openings: two on one side, like this."
"At the beginning it is concave, into which you pour what is needed, and according to how much it can hold without adding anything, so that when some cause draws out moisture from it, it may be drawn in, and when it is expelled, with this it may be drawn in, just like a funnel with which naphtha is poured onto naval battles."
"So when you want to pour moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the funnel into the moisture and draw with it what is poured into the openings above, because the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the funnel."
"And then insert the end of the funnel into the urethra as we have recommended in the chapter on circumcision; and promptly pour the moisture with whatever you pour, because that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and relief from that affliction will come."
"This is the shape of the fine sieve with which the bladder is sieved, and it looks like this:"
"And let it be made of silver or brass, with its head resembling a small feather in shape, and let it have this appearance from the inside."
"And then take a bladder, and pour into it the moisture that you want to sieve into the bladder, and promptly tie that with two strong ligatures made of doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"And then insert the end of the sieve into the urethra."
Approximately translate this line: "Next, stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity stretched downward within that patient so that that humidity has already reached the bladder."
If there is no bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that circle completely around its roundness; and immediately insert your finger strongly into those tracks, so that they are turned over; and again add the circle in such a way that it is attached also later on, because you pause in that water which you want of the humidities, oils and waters.
And now you put it into the instrument and do with that as you have done with the bladder, expressing with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX
Of the extraction of stone.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have said about the stone in which one operates with hand, and section (incision).
And the stone properly generated in the bladder is that which remains in the bladder.
And here we recount it with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children. And among its symptoms are: urine that is emitted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in its area; pain troubles the groin, and often penis, and sometimes is exacerbated; and with this condition there is often discharge from the anus.
And it would be easier to cure children of that illness than those who have reached fourteen years old; and difficult to treat in older people. "Yet among the young it may be milder because it is between those [feet]."
"And from that which has a greater stone and easier cure; And if it is few, it is contrary to this one."
"Therefore, upon arriving at the cure of this one, it is necessary at the beginning of this that we cleanse the patient with a cloth which extracts all the dust which is in its bowels; For sometimes that fold hinders the exit of the stone during the investigation of it."
"And then seize the patient by their feet and suspend them head downwards so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or else it may jump from its place sometimes."
"And then make that person lie between your thighs, and let his feet be placed on things of yours, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards its parts."
"Then perform this and all of it forcefully."
"Then if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut with a section above it."
"And if you don't know how to do it, then you should anoint with oil your little finger of the left hand if the patient is a child, or that same finger if the patient is young and complete, and insert that into their anus." "And ask the stone where it resides." "Then slowly guide that small stone into the neck of the bladder."
"And then press firmly with your finger and expel that stone outside through the opening where you made the section."
"Then command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the patient's thighs upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand to draw back the cord that is below the genitals, away from the location of the section."
"And then carefully insert the spatula as follows:" "And cut through it with water between the anus and genitals, not in the middle, toward the left side of the buttocks; and let the section be made over that stone, with your finger inside the anus, and let it be a transverse incision so that the opening outside may be wide and inside narrow according to how much of the stone can fit through, and no more, for otherwise you will compress your finger which is inside the anus, and the stone will remain stuck due to its difficulty."
"And know that some stones have angles or margins, making their expulsion difficult through this route."
"And of that water it appears similar to the glans penis, round and easily expelled."
"Therefore if it is one with angles or margins, adjust it in the opening."
"And if it is not thereby removed, then you must press upon it gently and decently with your finger, the tip of which should be like a chisel used to press against the stone, and do not let it slip away from you; or else insert therewith a subtle instrument with a curved tip."
"But if you cannot press upon it, then dilate the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut through that with a sharp instrument dipped in cauterizing vinegar."
"But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and make an incision thereupon; and carefully insert a little further therein; and similarly proceed if there are many stones."
"And if the stone is very large, then beware that you make a large incision thereupon, for ignorance leads to one of two evils: either retention or an inflammation due to continuous dripping of urine, because the location is not entirely consolidated."
"But apply expulsion from within that which remains stuck thereupon, or else engage in the fracture of it with forceps within that may extract it piece by piece."
"Therefore once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment made from aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it." "And apply over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in olive oil mixed with warm water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
"And carefully place the patient on his side, and do not remove the bandages until the third day."
"And once that has been removed, wash the location with warm water and much oil, and carefully dress it with a fine ointment and an ointment made from diaphoretic drugs until it is healed."
"But if inflammation and corruption occur in the wound, which appears like congealed blood in the bladder, and through this urine is prohibited (and that is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for otherwise it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction."
"And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply ointments suitable for all kinds of inflammation, with whatever is appropriate for its cure until it is healed."
"And during the entire period of cure, you must remain awake with both eyes open and adjust the medications which have been placed upon the location."
"And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and stuck therein so that emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with whatever I have mentioned earlier regarding sectioning, for many people have been accused of performing a section through this cure; and now I will explain to you how: take an iron sound, which has this shape:"
"of triangular shape with sharp points, attached to a stem."
"And then take flaxseed, and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
"And then insert the iron sound into the urethra, perforating gently until the sound reaches that stone." "Then rotate the sound with your hand against that stone little by little, and continue the perforation until you have pierced through it on the other side so that urine may flow freely."
"And then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone on its exit from the urethra, because it is fragmented and carried away with urine, and the patient is healed."
"But if this cure does not suit you for any reason which prevents it, then tie a flaxseed below the stone and another one above it." "And then make an incision over the stone in that urethra between the two ligatures." "And then remove that [stone]." "And then untie the bandages and cleanse the congealed blood which has formed in the wound."
"And it is not necessary to leave the flaxseed below the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above it only serves to keep the wound closed when the stone has been expelled."
"And for this reason, it is necessary when you remove the flaxseed above to elevate the cord upwards at its departure, or otherwise your finger will return empty and the wound will remain closed as we have said."
"Chapter LXI."
"Of extracting stones from women."
Stone in women's wombs rarely occurs.
But if a stone is found in any of these (organs), then the cure is difficult and forbidden by many methods.
One of them is that when the woman strongly desires to give birth
And the second one is that you do not find a woman who is well versed in her own body, so she cannot describe how to examine herself when she is menstruating, or whether she is married.
The third one is that you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation of manual examination
And the fourth one is that the place of the incision for stones in women's wombs is far from where the stone actually is, so it requires careful examination, and there is fear involved
But if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a woman midwife who knows her art well and is not easily frightened.
But if you are deprived of that (a woman midwife), then seek a physician who is wise and subtle, or present a woman matron well experienced in the state of women's bodies, or a woman who has been especially trained in this art.
Therefore have that one present, and command her to do everything that you will order her from the beginning of the examination until the end. For this is the reason why you should ask her: whether the woman is a virgin. If so, then she must put her finger in the woman's anus and try to feel for the stone.
Therefore if she finds it, have her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make the incision where she has indicated.
But if the woman is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and search for the stone, for she will place her left hand on the bladder and press firmly with good compression.
Therefore if she finds it, then gradually move her away from the opening of the bladder towards its sides with the strength of your virtue until you reach the thing in question.
And carefully make the incision on that side of the opening of the vagina where you have stopped and found the stone, keeping your finger firmly pressed against the stone as you withdraw it from there.
And let the incision be small at first. Then carefully insert the hook into that incision and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to the amount which you know the stone will pass through there.
And know that stones have many forms: some are small and large, some pointed and sharp, some long and round, and some with branches.
Therefore you will know how many types there are of it by what you have indicated about what you want.
And if you see flow of blood, apply a wet bandage with vinegar to that place for about an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation so that the stone may be removed.
And make sure you have prepared for yourself all of the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see flow of blood and know that the bleeding is coming from the artery that has been incised, then pause and apply powder to that place and press it with pressure bandage. Do not repeat this; leave the stone there and do not try to extract it, for great harm will come to the patient. Then dress the wound.
Therefore when the bleeding has ceased after several days and the place has healed, then return to your operation so that the stone may be removed.
Chapter LXII
Of incision for a strangulated hernia.
Hernia occurs when there is an accumulation of moisture in the white cipher, which is located behind the genitals containing the testes.
Sometimes it occurs within the proper scrotum itself, which nature has prepared for the purpose of containing the testicles, whether one or both have descended; and this is the cord of the testicle between the white cipher we have mentioned, and nothing more than that.
The cause of this hernia is weakness in the testicles that causes their contents to protrude through it, and sometimes it occurs due to a sudden impact on the testicles.
This fluid has various colors, sometimes it is declining towards yellow or reddish, or brown, or black and earthy, or clear and watery.
The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water has occurred are as follows: if it is in the white cipher mentioned earlier, then the swelling appears elongated and somewhat inclined towards the length, like the figure of an egg, and the testicle becomes visible, because the fluid contains it on all sides.
If the fluid is in the proper scrotum itself, then the swelling appears round and separate from the testicle, and for this reason it is estimated that it is another testicle.
If the fluid is between the cord of the testicles and the white cipher, then both sides swell together.
To determine the color of the fluid, you should examine the color of the fluid in the swelling through an incision made for this purpose. Based on what is expressed from within, you can judge what lies beneath it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition with surgery, we should command the patient to urinate if possible, and have him lie down on his back.
And let him be lying down on his back over a soft cushion placed slightly higher than the rest of the bed, and cover both sides with blankets.
Then sit yourself on the left side of the patient and command the assistant to stand on his right side. The assistant should extend his arm across both sides of the patient's groin and abdomen towards the inguinal region.
Then take a sharp, wide-bladed knife and cut through the center of the scrotum along its length close to the penis.
Make the section straight and carefully so that it is exactly parallel to the line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white cipher enclosing the testicle.
Peel back the skin and observe carefully, taking care not to incise it. Excise that portion which hangs down with the testicle more gently and subtly explore with the excision according to how much is possible.
Then make a wide perforation through the fluid-filled cipher, and remove all of the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the cipher at its edges. Do not touch the cord containing the testicles, and incise the cipher in whatever manner is possible for you. Cut through the entire cipher or in pieces, especially its deeper parts subtly and carefully, for if you do not thoroughly explore the incision, there is no certainty that the fluid will not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from outside of its cord during your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the cipher, return it to its place. Then approximate and suture together the two lips of the scrotum with stitches, and care for it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by some other disease, then you should tie off and ligate the vessels that suspend it, excise it, and care for it as we have said.
But if the fluid is gathered in two places separately, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise one side as you did the other previously, and if it appears to be an operation for hernia, then perform it.
Then clean away the blood and enter into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil. Then take another piece of wool immersed in wine and oil and spread it over both testicles and the abdomen. Then place doubled cloths and powder over them, and bind them together with a bandage following this pattern:
And take two cloths and fill them with wool carded in this manner. The ends of these cloths should be sewn together or moistened with wool to prevent slipping. They should then be secured with a bandage around the groin area, with one end extending from the buttocks towards the other, and the second end at the pubic region. Two additional straps should be placed on either side of the scrotum, and two more straps above the testicles, all adjustments should be made in the groin area of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a caustic iron instead of an incision with a knife. So you should take a sharp and thin cautery blade and incise the cord of the testicles with it. Then heat it according to our recommendation, until the white cipher containing the fluid is exposed. Then take the caustic iron in this manner: and it resembles the Greek letter ' gamma '.
Then pierce the cipher with it and heat it until all moisture is driven out.
Then extend the cipher with forceps and scrape it off with forceps and burn it away with a heated cautery tip. Then incise that area as much as you can until all of it is eradicated, but be careful not to let the fire touch the fluid.
Know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding than one done with an incision.
But if you encounter an abscess during the time of incision or cautery, or bleeding, then you should treat that complication according to what is appropriate for it, as has been discussed.
But if the disease is painful and does not wait for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform a perforation according to our recommendation. This should be done when you are certain, based on what has been said about the meanings, that the hernia in question is hydrocele.
Then you should make the disease recede over some raised swelling. Then perforate the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula and make the perforation according to the length of the body.
And the aperture should be wide enough to drain all the fluid.
Then close the opening with a dry bandage and tie it up tightly, so that any remaining fluid may be absorbed. Then care for it until the wound is healed.
But if there is difficulty in draining the fluid at that time, then you should perforate it again. This can happen because the surrounding fat tissue may obstruct the flow of fluid and prevent its drainage. In such cases, you should insert a trocar or other instrument into the wound to facilitate the removal of fluid, using the technique shown below:
Water returns and increases about six months after or around the time of those who have been affected by it. Once it has increased, it should be pierced according to that method, for thus the patient will pass their days.
"Chapter .lxiii."
Of section on fleshy hernia and its cure
Know that in the case of this type of hernia, there is great danger of loss when it comes to large hernias; therefore, I have seen many cases where it has been necessary to dismiss them and save the patient through this method.
And you should remember the operation in that case and the kinds of fistulas.
Therefore, I say that fistulas are born in the body where the veins have been obstructed and this happens for many causes: either due to acute pain from excess fluid which has flowed into the veins, or due to injury.
And the color of the fistula is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain; this is a serious fistula.
Furthermore, a very large fistula is one that is lapidated (turned into stone), its color being dark and insensitive to touch.
And sometimes it occurs due to the obstruction of arteries, and also from inflammation of those vessels such that one can already perceive the memory (i.e., signs) of it, or from inflammation of veins.
But that which happens due to inflammation of arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the fistula when you press on it with your fingers, without needing to touch it.
But that which occurs due to inflammation of veins does not disperse from it under any cause due to compression with the fingers.
"Now it is possible to make an incision on this kind of flesh and others; you should insert the needle into the groin of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards, extract that white cylinder, free the suspenders of the vessels, tie them, and cut the suspender so that you deliver it from all parts of the scrotum."
"If the testicle is already attached to those tissues, then you should remove the testicle and make an incision there."
"If there is adhesion within some cause of the scrotum or between that and the vessels, then you should remove all that adhesion and make a round incision there."
"But if there is natural flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you should cut all of that flesh and remove the testicle as we have said."
"Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and also take care of it with another cure until it is healed."
"Chapter LXIV."
"On the treatment of hernias that are caused by force."
"Aposteme surrounded by some enclosure like a bubble with softening of the testicles is called force, and it makes difficult movements and walking upon the sick part."
"And in the treatment of this ailment, fear comes before remembrance."
"However, we must speak about operation in that according to the first ones."
"And it is said that you should make an incision over an elevated cushion; and also peel the suspender of the testicles on both sides; and also tie the genitals with the aforementioned ties on both sides of the penis; and hold those other assisting instruments that you have, and extend them with a strong extension."
"And also cut with a sharp spatula through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed."
"And also remove completely from both sides as we have told you in the extraction of herniae which are on the temples."
"And also put a needle with double thread into those parts where the force occurred, and tie it in the first place of the said places, and tie it again in the last one." "And also cut those parts with a straight section according to the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated of fetid and corrupted humidity."
"And also treat the wound with the same treatment as other wounds where you want healing to be generated, because if one of the two genitals falls out, it is not bad for that."
"But if force occurs to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that they be tied with the vessels because of which there will be a privation of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they be cauterized, or that they be tied so that there is no benefit from them."
"Chapter 65."
"Of the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that happens in the groin extended over the abdomen, from the rings of the navel of the belly, so that some intestines descend through that rupture."
"And this rupture is either of the groin or of exception from it, and these two species occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by a sneeze, or by coughing, or by effort, or by elevation due to some heavy cause, or by similar things."
"And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the groin, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and it is an abscess that forms within the scrotum because the groin squeezes the intestine."
"And the sign of it is when it is due to section of the groin, because at the beginning there occurs sudden violent pain; and it is an abscess that appears different from those near the spine, appearing close by, which is due to extrusion of the intestine, whose body is located outside the groin."
"And sometimes the intestine sticks out through the ring and this type of hernia is called an 'umbilical hernia'."
"And sometimes there is flatulence, and sometimes the intestine slides into the abdominal wall and gets caught there, which causes great retention of the disease; and sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when pressed upon."
"And in the treatment of these species of this illness with iron, there is fear that the skin may be burned in that place."
"And the manner of operating on this is that you order the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to its place inside his curvature if he obeys its return; and then quickly cover it with your hands over its coil, elevating its edges."
"And then stretch the cord which secures the cord of the testes upwards, and cut through the entire cord of the testes; and then fix two clasps on both sides of the incision so that you can open it with those."
"And if the incision is made according to its quantity, as much as possible of that loop should be removed."
"And then strip away those fatty tissues which are next to the cord of the testes until the white hard scrotum is exposed on each side."
"Then you carefully insert your finger in that which is the testicle, inside the white scrotum, which is next to the loop of the cord; and behind it, between the second scrotum, and remove any adhesion that may be there."
"And then with your hand pull the cord of the testes upwards at its ends, and with this extend the white scrotum upwards with your left hand, elevating the testicle along with it; and command your assistant to extend the testicle further upwards while you dissolve any adhesion behind with hot water."
"And then carefully examine with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white hard scrotum." "But if you find any cause of it, then quickly push that back into the abdomen on that side."
"And then make an incision on that side of the cord of the testes through which blood and pus can flow as we have recommended earlier."
"And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and apply the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white scrotum near the incision of the blood vessel, for many times this happens); and leave the ligature so that it falls by itself."
"But if the wound closes late, then hot water should be poured over it and applied until it falls as we have said."
"And then treat the wound with other methods of treating wounds until it heals."
**Chapter 66.**
**On Ventous Hernia.**
In this hernia, it has not been seen that anything has been done about its cure using iron.
And the first thing to do is as we have recommended in the hernia that is with an exit wound: You must open the vessels near the section over that soft spot; and dry it up in the middle part around the abscess with something that draws out that fluid, until the vessels fall back into place.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter lxvii
Of the incision made in the groin.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the groins as we have said, and the area swells up.
And do not give any cause for the intestines to stick to the scrotum; and if they do, it is little; and returns on its own in all cases.
But if this continues for a long time, an adjustable split is made in the scrotum so that the intestine can slip into the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the groin as we have said, which causes the scrotum to become stretched out and soften, and the area becomes inflamed and swollen.
And the treatment of this is with a cautery, as was described earlier in the narrative.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: The patient lies on his back between the thighs of a woman, and then the area around the ruptured swollen abscesses is dried up with an incision made horizontally according to their size.
And then pull the scrotum tight below the penis so that it is exposed.
Then take a piece of iron and place it over the prominent area of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then heat the two prominent areas on either side of the scrotum using the tip of the iron, and then sew them together with a suture.
And then remove the tip of the iron, and do not make any incisions in the scrotum itself, nor extend the wound or cause any other injury as you will know from the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat it with the same care as you would a wound, and if you have incised the veins, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is healed; for the scrotum contracts and the prominence of the rupture does not remain.
Cautery is better in this location because it promotes healing more quickly.
Chapter 68
Concerning the softening of the spermatic cord
Often times, the spermatic cord in some men becomes softened because the flesh between it is softened, and this is noticeable.
Therefore, it is necessary for someone who wants to treat this condition that they make the patient lie on their back and incise all of the softened spermatic cord over the natural one. Then they should approximate two lips with a suture.
"And if you wish, begin by tying off the softened part of the cord with three or four knots and securing it firmly."
"Additionally, make incisions between the sutures; and take care to treat other wounds until they are healed and the pus has dried up."
Chapter LXIX
On castration.
You should know that castration is condemned in our law, but for certain reasons it has been mentioned to me that I recall this book; and its remembrance is necessary only for two ways: the first is so that you may have knowledge of castration when you are asked about it, and know how to cure those who suffer from it; and the second way is because we often have need of castration in other animals for our uses, as with horses, goats, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting through the skin or by making an incision with division of the flesh.
But in that which is done by cutting through the skin, the procedure is as follows: we should hold the beast in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed, and then grasp them with your fingers so that they hang down. And carefully take hold of those parts with your hand so that they are well grasped and do not appear outside the touch of your fingers.
But in castration performed by incision and division of the flesh, you should hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And carefully grasp the spermatic cord, then make an incision on each side with a cut so that both sides are divided.
And then carefully tie those parts with a ligature to prevent bleeding. And do not apply any dressing over the wound, but rather use a fine stitch that is placed above the vessels.
And this way of castration by cutting through the skin is better because it leaves no wound on the testicles so that the beast may desire copulation.
And then treat the wound so that it heals quickly.
Chapter LXX
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways:
"Sometimes urine flows from that vein which is in the chain of the testicles."
"In women, there is one kind: it is the cone of the woman above the penis which is like two small testicles in men, a little bit diminished at their exit from there like the male member and two testicles."
"And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women." "And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted fleshes within where that emission emerges, and then cure them with the same treatment as other plague wounds."
"And in the second kind of men from which urine flows that is in the chain of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it."
"Chapter XXII."
"About prolapse and prominence of flesh due to causes of women."
"Prolapse is lightly adjusted above natural causes within which it is stretched out and made legs according to regulation; and sometimes it becomes magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads out like that in men, and sometimes it penetrates into the coitus."
"Therefore you should grasp the prolapse with your hand or with a hook and insert it."
"And do not lastingly in insertion, especially at the beginning of the vulva, lest blood flow."
"And then cure it with treatment for wounds until it is healed."
"But flesh that is born is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and sometimes prolapses outside according to the shape of a tail (and for this reason some people first called it “tail sickness”); therefore we should insert it like prolapse, and cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter LXXII."
"About treating piles."
"Piles are when the anus of a woman is not perforated or has a small opening." "And it is either natural or accidental."
"Accidental piles are due to previous illness, and they are caused by flesh that has grown too much or by flesh that is thinly stretched or thickened."
"And they are found either in the front of the vulva or on its sides or above it or below it, and they hinder coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and sometimes they hinder menstruation."
"And its diagnosis is made by examining the vulva; if the prolapse is evident, it can be proposed; but if not, then examine it closely with your fingers or with a speculum."
"But if prolapse is due to thin flesh and protrudes between the two lips of the vulva, then grasp it with your fingers and reposition it."
"And if it lies above the two labia majora and does not retreat when you press your fingers on both sides of it."
"And if the woman is lying on her back, let her open her thighs and then with force spread the two labia majora so that this thin flesh is broken and the prolapse is relieved."
"And then take some wool soaked in olive oil and place it on that area and leave it there for a day so that the skin does not stick together."
"But if the flesh is thick and dense, then insert it with a broad spatula or with a leaf of myrtle."
"But if prolapse is due to excessive flesh, then suspend that flesh with a hook and cut it."
"And use medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and mastic mixed with white lead."
"And then insert a wide lead cannula to prevent the prolapse from healing too lightly."
"Keep it like that for several days and apply hot water compresses."
"And then heal it with other consolidation treatments until it is healed."
"And sometimes flesh is born in the vulva itself, and then insert it according to this method." "But if it is due to a hard tumor, do not cause any injury with iron in any way."
"Chapter LXXIII."
"About the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapsed rectum and red swollen veins that occur in the anus of women."
"Hemorrhoids are a collection of many veins around the anus from which blood flows continuously. And when these hemorrhoids become old and hard, they are called piles."
"And I have already mentioned in the division of their types and signs those that deserve treatment and those that do not."
"So I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are in the front of the vulva and do not appear to the touch, in these cases there should be no treatment with iron."
"But those that are in the opening of the vulva and can be felt, these are the ones that deserve treatment."
"It is necessary that you place the woman in a hot bath and then extend her arms with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut those with the scissors."
"And then sprinkle this powder over those cuts to stop the flow of blood from one of the wound's veins, such as with cassia or something similar."
"Then warm her feet for an hour, and then apply that water to the wound."
"And if the bleeding persists, later boil those cuts in a decoction of sumac and buckthorn husks and fig leaves and similar."
"Then take barley flour and combine it with honey and vinegar, make a plaster with that mixture, and apply it to the wound on her back."
"If blood is spilled, it's good. Otherwise, make the breasts adhere with two bandages, and scratch the nipples."
"Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of coriander, the juice of agrimony, and the juice of guaiacum with fivefold vinegar, and apply it to the wound. And then heal the wound with egg white when it is healed."
"And heal it until it is healed."
Capital seventy-four
On accidental perforation of a abscess in the abdomen.
Among the most common types of accidents happening in the abdomen are those like cancer and abscesses that lapidify, ulcerate, become adherent, erupt, form fistulas or wounds, and cause pain or swelling. And I have already spoken about these illnesses, their kinds, their signs, and their treatments in the division.
And it is necessary that I explain in this treatise about the cauterization of an abscess that appears in the abdomen when it comes from those that are healthy, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, if the patient becomes reddened and if they feel heat on it; then do not cut it open until it has ripened enough that the severity of the symptoms ceases. Cure it with water that helps in maturation.
And then it is necessary for you to cauterize the female over two cauldrons that have two openings; she should recline on her back with both buttocks and adjust her feet close to the fire, spread out her thighs, pause her arms beside her breasts, and tie each one with a wet cloth convenient.
And next to the midwife on her right side she should administer the instrument with which the opening of the abdomen is made, the form of which will be shown in those causes that are appropriate.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument you place yourself behind the woman's abdomen, and that only the tip of the instrument enters the abdomen and touches the illness. But if the instrument is larger than the tip of the abdomen, then it is necessary for you to put powders on the surface of the tip of the abdomen so that the entry of any instrument into the tip of the abdomen is prohibited.
And it is necessary that you place a thread that runs along the instrument on the left side and above, so that the person administering the instrument holds it and turns the thread until the opening of the abdomen has been made.
And when the excavation appears and is touched by hand and it is bloody and moist, then it is necessary for you to dry that with a linen cloth using the head of the spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary for you to put in the wound a cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil that has some degree of astringency and apply pressure on the section at the tip of the abdomen.
And then close the abdomen with clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it should be cured for two days with an ointment that is convenient, until it has healed.
And sometimes the wound and the cloth are washed with water and honey, and also with water in which rose of Jericho or long-rooted bistort has been boiled, and then it returns to the ointment.
And if the cloth sticks to the wound when it is moistened, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care of it with what we have said in this division.
Chapter LXXV
To teach midwives how to treat those women whose births are not proceeding normally in accordance with the natural form.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural birth through signs of it. And if you see the woman pressing her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and then she is relieved by what comes out from above her in labor, and rushes towards the exit of the child, then you will know that this birth is according to the natural form, and that the first one comes out on its head, and the second one with its feet or hanging down from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the belly so that the child comes out gently, because when the first one comes out on its head, the second one will follow, and it should be cleaned of any excesses with good cleansing.
But if this birth is not according to the natural form and it is not desirable, because when the child comes out on its feet, its body comes out before its head and its feet, and its hand or foot or belly comes out first, and then its head comes out and it turns over onto its neck, having similar forms that are not desirable.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, so that she guards against error and deception.
And I am showing you the whole figure of these, and what sign is in them so that it may be known by this and it stands on this.
When the feet come out first due to a natural error, and that is violent on the woman and it is difficult for her to give birth, and you see its strength already weakened, then do this: have the women hold it and evaporate its conium with fenugreek cooked in hot water and moist oil.
And then have the midwife insert her little spatula between its feet and gently separate them with it or cut that with her nail until what is in it of moisture has come out. And press on the woman's belly until the child comes out.
But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be sprinkled with powder of mastic and powder of fenugreek with incense.
And then command the child to be compressed and do that by sprinkling it with incense and make it sneeze; and put a cloth in its mouth and nose for one hour, because the child will quickly forget its fright.
And if both hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then you should gently reduce them little by little with softness. But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a pillow and lift its feet up, and quickly knock the pillow on the ground, so that the woman is held back from falling due to the impact.
And if the hands are not returned and the child is dead, then incise those and extract the remnant of the child or tie its body to its hand with cloth and extract it gently, because it will quickly forget.
When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary that you push those up and then turn the child gently, and then touch its anus with your finger, and then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
But when it has come out inside the hips, then command it to press itself and make it sneeze with incense, because it will quickly forget if God wishes.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have mentioned, then gently return the child little by little until you place it according to the natural form, because it will now quickly forget with gentle birth.
And if it is not forgotten with all that we have mentioned, then take powder of almonds and dissolved gum, and grind them well in the mortar, and then line the woman's anus and the lower part of her belly with that. And then have her sit in warm water until she obtains relief from the hips.
And when sometimes its joints are swollen, then make it inhale steam of myrtle and gently rub that on it. When the patient undergoes fumigation for an hour, then cover them with a blanket, make them sneeze and exhale their mouth, remove that, and press lightly on the lower part of their belly, because the fart will be forgotten soon.
Examination of the feces laterally while holding one of her buttocks. Let it be reduced by hand, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her squat.
And if squatting is not possible, then make her lie on the bed, and strike her buttocks violently with your fist, and then administer liniments and remedies of mucilages.
And if labor comes on, then make her sit on the chamberpot, and study about reducing the hand (the size of the fetus), and gather the feces according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to strain until it is forgotten.
Examination of the fetus while holding open the buttocks and noting that its fontanelle (soft spot on the head) is at the mother's back. It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on the fetus and then gradually turn it, making sure that it turns easily.
And when this is done and how much has been gathered, then pause on the anus with what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chamberpot and command her to lean over the right side, and also command her to strain; and make her sneeze conditionally. Preparation for the exit of the fetus over the side.
When you see the horrible face of the mother in this manner, consider, and then insert your second finger with your nail into the uterus until it is evacuated from the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over its face and neck, then insert your hand into the belly of it, so that it may not be retained and die.
And then push the fetus out through its passages until it stops according to what is necessary, and command the woman to strain several times, and God willing, it will be forgotten with a light examination.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and rarely happens; but there are two causes for it, and not alive.
And count those (twins), whether they are multiplied or one by one, and separate them with a sharp instrument, distinguishing between them in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten like this as if it were one fetus through natural examination that is light; but sometimes they are born through an examination that is not laudable, as we have recommended.
And if some of them are difficult during labor and delivery, as we have said about those with unnatural figures, then treat them in the way that we have recommended.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is skilled according to all figures as they are prepared by nature leading to health.
Reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed in the mother's womb, and it has been verified that one woman aborted seven, and another had all ten formed, which was caused by measurement according to the glorious wise men.
And also it is necessary for the midwife to know that this small figure of what has been described is very similar to this, and therefore pause if it is necessary according to what is needed.
Chapter 76
About the extraction of a dead fetus
When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it has not been expelled, and if then you must use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and not affected by any accidents that could lead to its loss.
Then the woman must be placed on her back on a soft surface and her head must be lowered downwards and her thighs raised up.
And the assistant should hold the woman on both sides or wrap her in a sheet to prevent her body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of marshmallow root, fennel seed and fenugreek seed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the uterus, and then seek with her hand where the hooks of the fetus are located.
And the appropriate place to find is: then consider whether the fetus is prepared to come out on its own head, and if so, then grasp it by the hooks of its arms or neck or mouth or palate or beard or furcula or near the ribs or hypochondria.
But if delivery is to be on its feet, then grasp it by the penis or middle of the back.
And it is necessary to grasp the hook with the right hand and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the left hand and grasp it in one of those places which we have mentioned until you reach the cause of death.
And then pause and hold it in the appropriate place with another hook or third one if necessary, to ensure equal traction and not simply lengthwise extension.
And let it be done for any delivery, so that the expulsion of it is alleviated as it is done in removing a tooth from its socket.
And it is necessary that the extraction be softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and gently insert them and revolve around that which is retained.
Then if the extraction of the fetus has been forgotten, then change hooks to one that is sharper; and do this until the entire fetus is extracted.
But if the hand is stuck ahead of the other one and it is not possible to reduce that by closing the fetus's mouth, then a cloth should be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is extracted, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or in the joint.
And do likewise with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large or it happens that its mouth is injured during delivery or there is water in its head, then insert spatulas between the fingers and cut its head open and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to do so, whose form will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which follows this one.
And similarly do if the head is large by nature; and then it is necessary to insert that with a bandage, or take it away thus as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
If the head is out but is compressed behind the clavicle, then let it be opened so that the fluid in the chest may flow out.
But if there is no complication or resistance to being born, then you should insert your hand into the head as soon as possible.
And if the lower part of the belly is inflamed or in labor with dropsy, then you must pierce it so that the fluid which is inside may flow out.
But if the child is on its feet, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mouth of the mother will be easy.
But if it is compressed behind the belly and the chest, then you must extract it with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and chest so that what is inside may flow out.
But if the other members are stretched out and the head returns, then let your left hand enter through the vagina; but if the mouth of the mother is covered, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb, seize the head with it, draw it back with those parts to the mouth of the mother, and at once insert a hook or two hooks, and draw it out with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess which has occurred in her, then it should not be treated with it; but rather, she should receive administration of evacuating fatty causes. And apply poultices to her; and follow up by administering waters that soften and moisten.
And if the child is lying on its side, then if possible, turn it gently; and administer what we have said for a live child.
But if that is not possible, then cut through the flesh and extract it.
And you must leave nothing inside the secondine (afterbirth).
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said regarding the treatment of burned ulcers which have occurred in the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply absorbent waters and administer the other treatments
I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and soon afterwards she became pregnant again, but the second fetus was also dead. It happened that an abscess formed on his belly soon after, and it became swollen until it burst open, and he began to vomit blood.
And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the illness did not abate
Then I placed over him poultices of strong attraction, and after some days an bone came out from him, and soon afterwards another bone came out; and I was greatly amazed, for there are no bones in the belly.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus
Therefore I cured the illness, and removed from him many bones. The woman recovered and remained in good health thereafter for a long time, except that she occasionally spat up a little blood.
And I do not attribute this to anything strange, but rather it is a sign of skill and assistance for the physician who practices healing with his hands
Concerning the forms of instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus
Form of cauls to open the mother:
"This is the method of strengthening in which books are bound, which binding has two virtues in both ends of two feet." "However, this virtue must be more subtle than the stricter one and should be made either of ebony or boxwood."
"And the width of each foot is two digits and the margin of each is one digit, and the length is a palm and a half; and in the middle position of two feet are two adjustments made by that same piece of wood which are already fixed, of which the length is mostly a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two digits or a little more."
"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the press so that it may be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed virtues."
"Another similar form is that which is more subtle and lighter:"
"It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of forceps." "But however at the end of it there are two adjustments like this, and the length of those adjustments is two palms, and the width of each is two digits."
"And when you want to open the press with those, then you should place the woman on her back on the bed with weights hanging down, opening what is between her legs." "And properly open your hand with the instrument like you do with tongs, according to the amount that you want of the aperture of the mouth of the press until the metronome makes what you want."
"The form of virtue which they called:"
"The shape of the pushing device with which one pushes the thing:"
"The shape of the container in which the large head is contained."
"And it is similar to forceps at whose ends the teeth are like this, sometimes they are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes their teeth are like those of a comb with which one incises and contains." "The shape of the container for little things:"
"The shape of a hook having a spine:"
"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
"The shape of a spoon having two extremities with which the head is severed."
"The shape of two wide spoons:"
"Moreover, all those instruments are practiced and when they are multiplied and prepared by the craftsmen, the lighter they are in their operation, the more skilled must be the men due to their quantity."
"And do not operate those instruments in any way, for the need of them is not excusable."
"Concerning the extraction of the second part [of the fetus]:"
"When the second part [of the fetus] is retained during labor, then you should order the midwife to hold her breath, and properly make her sneeze with condition, and place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this it comes out, well."
"And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in it through which you place those herbs burned over the mouth of the press like calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic cumin, cassia wood, and Saint John's wort." "All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire."
"And properly place a reed cannula in the mouth of the press, and hold it there until the evaporation reaches the concavity of the press."
"And properly make her sneeze as we have said, and the second part will be expelled with speed."
"But if this cure is not promptly applied and it is not expelled, then order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or an emulsion of almonds, and properly insert that into the vagina and search for the second part with it, and when it has been found, then take it and extract it little by little straight up so that the press does not suffer from violent traction." "It is necessary that they be changed on both sides with ease."
"And if the mouth of the press is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and with medication of the cloth with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to weary yourself with repeated attempts at extraction, but rather what has come out of her into the mouth of the press should be put on the thing of the woman, and properly cauterize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to disappear after a few days and it will be dissolved and expelled."
"But when it disappears, there will be an elevated bad odor at the head and stomach, and that will lead the midwife astray; and therefore fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered for that."
"But some of the Ancients have already been tried with fumigation of mustard seed and dried figs."
"Form for an instrument by which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menses and of the second part:"
"It should be made of glass or earthenware."
"And the subtle extremity should be placed in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the embers of the fire."
"And hold that until that fumigation is consumed, and repeat another one."
"Regarding the cure for an unperforated anal sphincter:"
"Many children are born with their anal sphincters not perforated, which appear thin and obstructed." "Therefore, the midwife should perforate that sphincter with her finger; and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the skin."
"And moreover place on that wool infused in wine and oil; and properly cure it with ointment until it is healed."
"But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then place a cannula in the hole for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And it has already happened that the anus becomes obstructed due to consolidation of a plug or of an abscess; therefore that consolidation should be incised, and moreover it should be cured with what we have said regarding the cure and lead."
"Regarding the cure for fistulas that form from there:"
"The fistulas that form in the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and coarse, which form near the anus outside or in the space between the two buttocks."
"And it is one fistula or several."
"And with that node being ancient and running with moist white matter or subtle pus, there are sometimes penetrating passages."
"And those passages are known by what comes out of them through the exit and the windiness; and sometimes the illness of egressions is used, and often much is expelled from them."
"And it happens sometimes that those fistulas have penetrating passages into the bladder and into the urethra, and from those passages there can be penetration into the junction of the vulva and into the neck of the womb."
"And this is how a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula into the anus is known: when you insert your finger into the anus and attempt to introduce a thin probe of wax or iron into the fistula where there is not a tortuosity."
If in that case it is a tortuosity, then introduce into that subtle vein of lead or horsehair through which you feel the vein or the pulse in your finger.
And if you do not find that vein nor any cause of obstruction or worms or windiness, as we have said, then you would know that it is non-penetrable, and thus you should cease your treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its meaning is emission of urine from there and prohibition of it until that place is healed in medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causing pain around it, then its sign is that the vein has entered here if there is not tortuosity in the bone, and causing pain around the starting point; and that there will always be putrefaction from there; and that no medication will work there, nor will it heal with an ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of foolish physicians about which we are firm.
But in that one which is not penetrating and is not ancient, cure with iron is hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and that which I have already said.
And it is that the disease appears between your thighs but more especially towards its two sides and raises the skin of it within itself, with the hips inclined toward its belly, and appropriately enters a thread of lead or of wool if there is tortuosity in the fistula, into which you should know where the vein has entered.
And if that one feels the disease around its buttocks, then it is necessary for you to enter your little finger into its buttocks.
And if you feel the vein already openly entered with your little finger, other than that which you feel between your little finger and that one or flesh, then you can be certain that that one is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But however some people say that it has healed in some men.
And of the medication by which help is hoped for in it is that you ignite a cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and enter that burned into the fistula until it reaches around its buttocks; and appropriately repeat that twice or thrice until you know that all those joined fistula tissues that are like feathers of birds' quills have already been burnt.
And also cure that with hot compresses wrapped in cloth until all those burnt tissues have cooled down, and appropriately cure it with medicines generating and strengthening flesh, and if it has healed, good. And if not, then it will never be healed by any other cure at any time.
And if the vein enters but does not penetrate within your little finger which is in its buttocks and between that one and the vein that is covered with flesh or skin, and if the fistula becomes wide at that point where the surface of the thigh begins, then dry up the thigh from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dried by the vein, and may be inside the fistula until the section reaches to the place where the end of the vein is, and through the vein it is relieved and cleansed.
And also clean those fistula tissues which are like feathers of birds' quills, and do not leave any remnant of them.
But if blood flow comes between you and your operation when you are cutting those tissues, then the best thing to do is cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good twice habits: it is a burning of those burnt tissues and an absorption of the blood and an exsiccation of humidity.
And also cure it with hot compresses wrapped in cloth or in soft wool until that place is completely healed. And then also cure the wound with firm and hard flesh generating and strengthening medicine.
And such medicines are those which have astringent and exsiccant properties. When it is restored, then it has healed completely and there is no need for repetition.
But if the fistula already reaches to the front of its buttocks and is elongated from its surface on the body, then enter your little finger into it and inquire with that one.
And therefore if you feel the vein and between it and you there is skin or flesh that prevents penetration, then do not operate on it except according to the faithful way of trust and hope.
And therefore administer one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it up until the concavity of it allows you to enter your finger and the appropriate cure; and do not proceed with cutting lest you cut into the sac containing its buttocks, and thus you cause suffering unnecessarily upon the estate without consent. And then appropriately cure it as we have said because strong and clean will heal quickly; or else remove that skin covering and clean up that pus which dries up within around its buttocks as we have said, either with your finger or with another instrument of sharp point, and also clean those fistula tissues which are in the section where you can do so by cauterization. And then endeavor to make the restoration of all the wound by cutting, and if the upper opening does not heal, and remains open on its buttocks, then it will suffer lightly from suffering. And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you enter your finger into it and it goes around to its side near the surface of the body and on its margin, then take a needle with pierced point, which is like a needle for preparing hearts according to this form:
"I now enter that tight fold of your thighs and turn those around, then I enter trying with a file into the fistula until I reach its cavity."
"But if you are penetrating into the margin of the anus from behind, then pull out the file from that track so that you can introduce your little finger into the anus; and extract the end of the file, adjust both ends evenly, and stretch each one, leaving it like that for a day or two. Then when the file has been inserted more into the flesh, carefully stretch that until those tissues have been cut which are between both ends of the file."
"And then heal the wound once it has solidified and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but only on the front, because it is not for you to do this so that you do not injure the skin; and then heal that until it is healed."
"The form of the spatula spinos with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other edge is not-sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes happens."
"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the opening of those [hemorrhoids]."
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks resembling those that are like coal, or those which are like fat from lard." "And of those which are small and large, and blood flows from them constantly and is one, and there are many, and they are outside the anus, and at its extremities."
"But those hemorrhoids which are outside the anus are according to few humors, from which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body."
"And the treatment of that hemorrhoid which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit down and squeeze until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you." "Then you take hold of it with forceps or whatever you have available and lift that up with your nail, and immediately cut through those veins."
"But if the forceps are not held in those due to the humidity of them and their softness, then grasp that with coarse cloth or cotton or wool thread and extract that with your fingers, and immediately cut through those and sprinkle some powdered myrrh over the incision so that it is placed on those instead of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization." "And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then you should cauterize the patient with cautery which has a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the anus so that it may evacuate easily when the patient squeezes."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is that you grasp them with your nail or with forceps and cut through those, and immediately treat them with water as mentioned above until they are healed."
"And when you have made the incision, it is necessary that you administer suturing of them according to this manner: take linen thread and wrap it around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at their extremities above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle in the vein of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread on either side of the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid tightly, and then tie the thread and remove the needle."
"And do this to all of them, and leave one of those open and do not close it, so that the excess blood may flow from that."
"And then place over the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and have the patient lie down on their back and command them to remain so." "And then leave that alone until it is healed; and when it has healed, treat those with an ointment or with another treatment until they are completely healed."
And since those are old and no longer effective in that medicine, therefore it is necessary for you to remove those with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they are moistened and remove from above the accumulated pus which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure them once they have consolidated.
Now, remove those with great care so that the first one does not become inflamed and are scratched; and then cure them once they have healed.
You should know that inflammation is key, and it is not if not red like the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more so in the parts below the hips and thighs, where you must apply ointment.
And then it is necessary to cut what is in the area of the key and hold it with forceps or tweezers and remove its root; and then cure it.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is preceded in its chapter.
A verruca (wart) is a small, rough, fistulous elevation on the surface of the skin, often seen in many children.
And to treat it, you should spread and cut that with a knife or shave it with thread or hair inside its capsule. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with an acute medicine.
A formicaria (milia) is a small, downy or fistulous elevation on the surface of the skin, occurring mainly in the forehead. When it is touched, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it usually appears around the body.
And to treat it, take a quill from an ostrich or a vulture feather, strong and pointed, and press it onto the milium so that its circle covers all parts of it. Then revolve your hand with the quill inside the milium, pushing it down into the skin until you have eradicated the milium by its root.
And if you wish, do this with a silver or iron needle in this manner:
The point of the needle should be drawn out to a fine, blunt tip (i.e. not perforated) and wrapped with something so that when you press it against the skin, it is smooth and its revolution causes no pain.
And if you wish to cauterize the milium, do so as described in the chapter on cautery of warts.
Regarding the shape of instruments used for giving circumcision:
"Sometimes a crucible is made of silver or brass, melted or hammered. Sometimes it is made small or large according to the one being served, for the one who serves in the care of little children should be small; and those whose backs are frail or crooked, their crucibles should be small."
"The shape of a large crucible is like this:"
"The head of the cannula's tip above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should be at the distance where the bag is tied as shown."
"And the bottom end of it which is inserted into the buttocks should be blunt and rounded with precision; and on one side of it there are two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the rays, being wider where necessary."
"And the bag in which medications are placed is made of bladder or sheep's skin, and its opening is one palm wide."
"And it should be pierced with many cuts all around so that when it is rolled up, the space between the cuts should be the thickness of a finger."
"And then insert a strong thread of raw linen into those cuts, or around them, and fasten it to the bag. And when the bag is placed on it, tie it tightly at the tip of the cannula between two marks with a strong knot, and then cristerize with that knot: But the quality of cristerizing with it is that you heat the medicine bag according to the quantity that can be tolerated by the patient; and make sure that it is not too hot nor too cold."
"And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their buttocks up and place under them a cushion on which they can lie comfortably. And then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it gently into the anus, and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it forcefully between two hands to expel all that is in the cannula into the bowel. And then remove the cannula and the patient raises their buttocks up against the wall."
"And if the medicine causes a strong evacuation, hold it as long as you can. And if you sleep with it overnight, it will be more effective."
"But if you cauterize in cases of intestinal obstruction and evacuation is difficult, then repeat the cautery until it is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or bleeding fistulas in the anus, then use a thin and pointed cautery, such as those with which children are cauterized."
"De curacio de las plaguas."
"I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of plagues what was suitable for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hand and medicine according to the completeness."
"Therefore I say that plagues are diverse according to what they are caused by, and according to the place on which case the plague occurs."
"And the causes by which often plagues are made are such as kidney stone, or incision of flesh or bone, or piercing with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or resembling those of many causes."
"But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and resembling those of the members."
"And I am recounting the treatment of some plagues for which that reasoning and rule are sufficient over the others."
"And I will begin with simple head plagues, because the memory of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"So I say that when there occurs in the head a simple plague and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to kidney stone or something similar, and already the chain has struck only once and is a large plague, and you fear that having an aposteme will happen afterwards, then you perform cephalic cautery and phlebotomy at once, and do not delay; and draw out from there as much blood as possible according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some cause prohibiting phlebotomy exists, especially if the blood that has flowed from the plague is little."
"And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the parted plague, and guard the patient from sneezing, wind, and heavy foods."
"But if you prohibit any cause due to minuteness, then let him be diminished in his food and not approach meat or wine."
"And pause on the plague, if an aposteme occurs afterwards, then cut it open and place in it roasted rose oil or wine in which is steeped."
"But if it is sure of an aposteme happening afterwards, then pause on the plague, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recount later in a small way."
"And if the air has already changed that one, then pause on those injuries until they are healed."
If the wound is large or caused by an incision and its edges are not well approximated due to pus, then approximate them with stitches according to my instructions on wound closure.
But if the wound is already discovered from the bone and there is no retention of it but only a slight suspension, then cut that away and dress the wound with medicines appropriate for it, restoring the flesh properly instead of skin, and order the patient to be fed with foods that are easy to digest: capons and soft fruits and similar things until they are convalescent.
And if you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotting and cast it out, and dress it properly.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows abundantly and it cannot be arrested by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it; and if necessary, cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is slight; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder on them, so that they may be consolidated before the air changes them.
And the manner of this powder is as follows: take olive oil one part, dragon's blood three parts, and quicklime five parts; grind it all well and sift it, and fill the wound with it, and constrain it with a good dressing until it adheres to it, and coagulates with blood.
And then press it gently from above with powders and leave it alone, without removing the dressing until it is completely healed, for if you remove the medicine too early, its effect will be lost before it has had a chance to heal.
And sometimes this can be done with cautery alone when olive oil and dragon's blood are not available.
And this same operation should be performed on large wounds when it is necessary to press upon them and constrain them, especially in fresh wounds with abundant blood that has not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. Rather, treat these wounds with what was said earlier, such as applying some ointments or dusting flour mixed with water and honey on them until they gain consistency; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
If you should encounter a small fracture in bone during surgery, then extract it with forceps.
And I will tell you the treatment of head fractures that are life-threatening.
Of the wounds in the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it should be treated like a simple wound on the head.
But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to be done except to avoid treatment of it with anything that causes great constriction, such as zinc and lead which burn like vitriol and cause contraction of the nerve. And do not apply any dressing to the wound for fear of damaging the nerve, because the substance of nerves is delicate and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of power for all limbs.
And if you should treat it with gentle medicines, such as washing it with rosewater or infusing it in olive oil, hot or cold, and turpentine when washed with rosewater and other minerals according to this method, then apply a damp compress.
But if the wound is large, then stitch it up or press its lips together and apply powder internally until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or has occurred on the lower part of the neck with gangrene, then pierce it in the most depressed place.
But if an artery has been cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then separate it or press it to stop the flow of blood, ligature it, or cauterize it with hot irons if necessary.
But if the spinal cord has been severed completely or partially and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the bone of the spine and do not touch it; extend it gently and reduce it to its natural shape, and apply gentle traction decently, leaving it for a few days; and treat it with damp compresses that cause constriction and excitation internally until it heals.
But if the wound has reached the bone and caused fracture, then percuss it and remove all fragments of bone that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound heals and separates, and its inflammation is relieved.
And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have recommended for you. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the remedy that I will mention later in its proper chapter.
If it is a wound caused by a lance or dagger, and its depth varies according to the weapon used, then consider whether there is wind from the wound when the patient breathes out; if so, you should know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with blood, then pause in it for the first hour with powder, and do not apply pressure to prevent blood from being retained in its depth and returning to the heart and aggravating the patient's condition, but rather use an attractive poultice and change it twice a day.
And if an poultice is not available, then cover the wound with cotton wool to prevent air from entering it; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is contained within flows out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and there is no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the lung, and all other conditions are good, then you should know that the wound is safe; and therefore treat it with hot compresses and other remedies until it heals.
But if the healing of the wound is delayed and all this time has passed, then you should know that a fistula has already formed; therefore treat it according to its proper chapter.
And if the wound is caused by a slash with a sword or dagger and is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then treat it with what has been mentioned for suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if the bone has been reached and pieces of it have already broken off, then turn the wound and carefully try to extract those pieces if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound heals, as their extraction will be easier then.
And regarding other accidental wounds on the other limbs, the treatment for them is the same as what has been mentioned (for similar wounds).
Regarding abdominal wounds.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be great, small, or moderate.
And small ruptures are difficult to repair by any other method, and since reduction of them is also difficult if the intrusion into its proper place is not immediately corrected, as it will widen and swell making the intrusion difficult.
Therefore the best rupture is moderate, as in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike the two species mentioned earlier.
And you should know that abdominal suturing is done in four ways, but two of these methods are common and apply to other wounds on the body.
And the other two methods are specific for abdominal wounds, although they also apply to other wounds.
I will now explain each method with its proper description and illustration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowel protrudes through it, making reduction difficult, this can happen in one of two ways: either because of the small size of the rupture as mentioned earlier, or because of inflammation of the bowel due to exposure to cold air.
And therefore when this happens, you should then apply a poultice made of oak bark decoction or other similar plants mixed with the affected bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes this poultice may contain astringents, which are better for resolving inflammation than water alone.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the bowel with water containing alum and mallows, as this helps to reduce swelling without much effort.
But if the reduction of the bowel is not achieved with this treatment, then carefully cut open the rupture a little using an instrument called emorroydas.
And the first cure is best when it is appropriate and not a section, and there is no need to cut unnecessarily due to deficiency or lack of skill.
Regarding the instrument, here is its shape:
One end of it is tapered and sharp, the other blunt, with a fine tip, but not too fine like a spatula, rather somewhat obtuse.
And therefore when the wound is enlarged and some of the bowel protrudes, its reduction should be done according to its natural shape, in its proper place if possible, as this is better.
But when the rupture is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and elevate their buttocks higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then elevate their head higher than their feet.
"Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then keep your intention and consideration always there so that the part in which the plague is may be placed further away than the other."
"And also when you administer this in large or medium-sized wounds."
"And in small wounds, keep this preparation ready. And especially make sure that the one who ministers is between your thighs, holding the disruption entirely with their hand and adjusting the lips of it. And especially uncover from here to there so that no other cause prevents suturing."
"And this is the common manner of suturing: one should take the needle, or count needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle through one side of the thread, making sure not to put the knot at both ends of the thread. And then insert it into that party from there, so that you have already joined two sides of the thread and two sides of the ciphac which is below the threads, inside which you will make those four rows."
"And then stretch with a double thread around the needle, and sometimes tie both parts together at once, and then join both lips and the wound by appropriate joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle there, and then tie it with thread as before with the first needle. And do not cease doing this if necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
"And needles should be medium in thickness and fineness, for fine needles hardly cut into the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread, and therefore they should be medium in both thickness and fineness."
"And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted too close to both ends of the thread, lest the flesh be lightly cut and the wound opens before its consolidation."
"And sutures should not be prolonged, so that the wound is not prohibited from healing."
"Next, carefully remove the points from the needles so as not to disturb the patient's sleep; then apply powdered plant extracts evenly over the sutures, which should be held firmly in place by the ends of the needles."
"For these suture methods using needles, it is most appropriate to use them for small wounds, as they can be secured with one or two needles or even several."
"The second suture method is as follows: you should administer the suture by simultaneously sewing all four extremities of the wound's edges with a single needle, ensuring that it is carefully and smoothly wrapped around each one."
"And when the needle has penetrated all four extremities, withdraw the needle from the first point where you began, so that the thread pulls the edges of the wound together evenly, creating a suture like one made with cloth."
"And pause between each stitch roughly the thickness of your little finger."
"And this suture is known to men."
"And with this suture I sewed the wound which had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been struck by a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm's breadth, and it was extending from the bowels around two palms' breadth from the navel and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it so that the bowel which had been outside the wound returned into its place within twenty-four hours."
"And the wound was consolidated in the space of about fifteen days and healed; and afterwards he lived many years and regained his former health."
"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and it was by miracle that he was healed, for you did not treat him with any ointment or medicine, but simply paused over the wound twice a day and washed it gently with honey water until it was healed."
"However, you mentioned two types of suture according to the narrative of Galen."
"And so you begin with the suture of the abdomen, inserting the needle from without inwards."
"And then with the needle penetrating into the abdomen and that same measurement following its lengthwise direction throughout the entire body, leave the end of the thread at which you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the thread penetrate from within outwards in the other extremity of the wound."
"And when you have done that, then make the needle penetrate again in the same extremity of the wound from without inwards; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from within outwards."
"And make that penetration with which you make the needle penetrate into the thread in the extremity of the wound which is on the inside, so that all may penetrate."
"And then begin on this same side and bring together the two extremities which are of the thread on the other side, and remove the needle from the abdomen which has penetrated, and then reduce it in that abdomen and join the extremity of the thread which is on the other side with this extremity of the wound; and remove that which is on the inside of the abdomen."
"And do this once or twice until you have finished everything that is outside according to the example given."
"And the sum of this manner of sutura is that you complete it with a suture of skin with which you join the skin, so that you leave the thread once from the part of the extremity of the abdomen and leave it again until it has been completed."
"However, the second type of suture properly described by Galen is this: that you join it according to its half-length, as some physicians do; thus joining every part to its corresponding part by nature and applying the extremity of one to the extremity of the other, and this is done as I have recommended."
"When you have left the needle in the extremity of the wound near the outside, make it penetrate from without within on that same spot and leave two extremities of the thread; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from without within in the other two extremities of the thread."
"And then turn those casings around and make each one penetrate from within outwards in the other two extremities of the wound on the opposite side."
"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously spoken."
"This is Galen's speech"
"And some people say that suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in each one a thread and begin with insertion of the needle from where it should be according to those who sew the hearts together."
"And know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen."
"But the treatment of plague is judged by the treatments of other plague-like diseases."
"The cause of this is because when you encounter plague recently with its blood in front before the air alters it, and reduce the vein and join it and dress it appropriately, then it stops on that inflammatory powder."
"And if the air has already altered the plague, then it stops on some of those things which are present inside that make hard callus and squeeze out the threads and consolidate skin and wound; and then treat it in this way as is the treatment of other plague-like diseases until it heals."
"But if the medicines are not present at that time, then it stops on it immediately, because soon after it begins to emit stench and pus, and changes its color twice a day, as you have seen, until it heals, for you do not need other medicine in many dispositions when plagues are simple."
"But if you fear that the plague will communicate to an injury of the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to immerse lion's wool in olive oil of good quality or in rose oil and apply it around the joints of those places and leave it on."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its veins because many times this happens, then cauterize it with black stiptic wine and especially if the putrefaction has reached the vein and an exiting penetration has been made into its concavity."
"And know that that which is of the great vein is of easier healing than that which is in the small veins."
"And it is of difficult healing because the vein which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that occurs in it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its size and subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves."
"But if what proceeds from the plague is flesh, and you encounter it recently, then reduce it according to your skill with which you reduce veins equally."
"But if it has passed to that place and is already green or black, then stretch it with a thread dipped in pitch on the spot which is darkened by it, so that fluxes of blood may come forth, because in flesh there are veins and arteries."
"And then you shall cut away that which is other than this lymph, and pause two ends of the string hanging from the wound's edge outside the abscess, so that you may lessen its attraction, you must remove the covering of the fabric and emission of the arm from the abscess."
"Reminder of the treatment when such abscess occurs in the bowel."
"When such disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it may sometimes be restored in certain individuals. For this reason, you should see him who was struck on his belly with a lance and had an abscess on the right side of the stomach, which was old and fistulous; and its treatment was accomplished with great ease."
"Therefore, you should follow the cure of that wound which is already confirmed in its healing, but cease to probe that part which was healed and let it rest consolidated."
"And since you saw that the place was consolidated, then you should consider what illness might result from this accident in his belly; and he did not change at all because of this misfortune, remaining in his usual good health, eating and drinking well, and even entering into baths and exercising as usual."
"And already some experienced men have said that when an abscess occurs in the bowel and is small, it should be tied up in this manner: take frogs with large heads, and exactly place both lips of the wound on either side of one of those frogs that has its mouth open, so that when it takes hold of them and stretches its mouth wide, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve."
"And also place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this until you have used as many frogs as there is of the entire abscess."
"And then reduce that [the wound] and close it with the abscess, leaving those heads attached inside the bowel until it is healed; and there will be no harm or damage."
"And it is also possible to tie the bowel with a subtle thread made from the gut of an animal, since this is thinner; and this is how you should do it: take the end of these gut threads, making sure it is well cleaned, and then tie the end of it around itself, wrapping it; and then insert that thread through needles and sew it together with the bowel, reducing it in its opening."
"And this manner of suturing with frogs is nothing but a way of trusting and hoping [for healing]."
"But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small bowels because then there will be only a subtle scar left, not complete healing."
"Regarding the treatment of fistulas."
You know that every ulcer and abscess, when it bursts open and becomes ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, continually throws out pus but is not cut off, then universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that same ulcer.
And truly a fistula is a hollowed out and closed off nodule, hard and white with it there is no pain and having concavity just like the concavity of a bird's foot; and therefore that ulcerous scar is named thus, that is bird's-foot.
And it is in humans that ulcers are moist which throw out pus; but soon the moisture is cut off in some hours Sometimes this moisture is thick and scant and gross and subtle
All those causes have already been shown, along with the symptoms of each and their cure using medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that I should make you aware of the treatment for fistula, which is done by operation with a knife.
And you should know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some are fistulas which connect to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to the bowel, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed by composition as of the hand and foot; and some of them open into the vicinity of the main member and similar ones.
And therefore those fistulas which are of this kind are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe or an iron hook, and if the fistula goes straight, then explore it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, for lead by nature of its body is light and curved according to its tortuosity.
And if the fistula has many holes, it will not be possible for you to examine it with a probe.
Then cleanse the bowels through its bowels, for the moisture with which you cleanse that one goes towards the other bowels and runs from them.
And therefore ask carefully, according to which manner you may know if here you have the bone or nerve, and it is the concavity of the long-distance fistula or nearby, or is a fistula to whose mouth bowels are opened and is above all with the sum of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the invention of the pain towards your compression with the hand on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes concerning the abscess.
And when you shall have stood upon all those causes with true stay, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now if it is apparent fistula near or in sound place, long-distance from junction, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I gave to you and said.
Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before of its narration, and hold this which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the mouth of the flesh or of the bile and similar things, and cure that entrance which shall be healed.
But if the fistula is of long-distance profundity, and is according to rectitude, then it behooves that you insert that in the perineum as far as to you shall be possible, and properly cleanse that of all its corrupt flesh; and properly administer cloths wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this several times within that the acute medicine may corrode all that is raw in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
And properly restore it with ointments which engender sound flesh within until it shall be healed.
"However, if it does not heal with this, then cauterize according to what we have advised."
"If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be certified as such, then you should inquire there and dry it according to what we have advised, unless there is any prohibition due to a vein, nerve, or main member, as we have said."
"But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then scrape away that within until all the corruption is removed; afterwards cure it with this, so that it may be healed."
"And if it does not heal and throws out arm as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; therefore open up carefully again and thoroughly examine its cause and cleanse it with your strongest medicine, and afterwards restore it."
"And thus if it is healed, that is good. But if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep and distant parts of the body, which has not been reached; therefore in this case there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
"And if the corrupt bone is small or cannot be pulled out, then pull it out with delicate forceps suitable for that purpose."
"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind due to any fear of your strength."
"But if there is any difficulty due to humidity or moisture, and there is no fear of harm or mistake in its incision, then incise those membranes or flesh that are here, and deliver the bones."
"But if there is no opportunity to remove the bones at that time, then place a plug in the wound and seal it with plaster so that the wound may not close up around those flesh bones and membranes; keep watch over the wound so that it does not heal until the section which you have incised in your operation is firm."
"Therefore, if you fear that the wound may close up before healing is complete, apply a poultice made of olive oil or Egyptian pitch or one of the other ointments to keep it open until the membranes are separated from the bones and the attraction of the bone ends is facilitated."
"But if it is a large bone like the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape off only that part which is affected by the blackness and corruption, and immediately restore the plug."
"But if a large part of the bone is corrupted and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close up that wound and incise into the place where the corruption has penetrated; then cure it until it is healed."
"And I recommend to you that which pertains to a man regarding his shinbone, namely to place a bandage or splint on it as an aid in your operation."
"A young man of about thirty years happened to have pain in his shinbone due to a swelling below the knee, which extended into the flesh and reached the bone; it was an abscess with a large amount of pus, not caused by any external injury."
"And so the time was prolonged with that abscess due to the error of physicians who delayed its opening until a great deal of matter had accumulated; and its cure was suspended until the thighbone became fistulous, and many openings were made in it which discharged much pus and humidity from the body."
"And then after a long time of being cared for by many physicians over two years without any benefit or skill on their part, I was called."
"And when I saw the thighbone of that man and the matter flowing out of it through those openings, his whole body was already emaciated and his complexion was yellowish."
"And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone with it."
"Then you should examine all the openings carefully and find out which ones communicate with all parts of the thighbone."
"And then I took hold of the thighbone and incised one of those openings in order to discover a part of the bone which I found to be earthy, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the thighbone was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle."
"And then show what has been discovered and prepared from the bone laid bare to me."
"And I showed that it was not in the bone itself but only in that corruption which had been removed and closed up; you had already removed it."
"Then apply the restoration of the plug with a medicinal ointment for a long time until it becomes consolidated."
"Then you should reopen and lay bare again over the bone according to the first opening, and find that there is continuous corruption with the bone."
"Then close up what appears to you of that corruption, and then apply the cure and restoration for it, but it will not be restored."
"And then open it up again and do not cease cutting into the bone little by little particularly until you cut around about a palm's breadth of it, and remove its marrow with it; and then apply medicines to restore it, and it will be easily consolidated and healed."
"And there is no need for iteration in the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its weakness and the poverty of its tolerance and fear of death, because it always has accidie from too much evacuation or bad syncope."
"Therefore, when it is healed, it will be completely healed and there will be nothing in place of the hard bone and flesh. And its disposition within its body will be good and it will return to its natural strength; and it will be converted into its former state without causing any opposition in walking or harm from any cause."
"But if the bone is prominent in place of the flesh, then you should section it in this manner: take linen and strengthen that at the end of the projecting bone, and command someone to extend that outwards; then pause that first bandage made of thick wool; then bind that over the flesh which is near the bone, and extend its extremity so as to draw back the flesh from those parts, and uncover the flesh where you want to cut so that the saw does not touch it."
"And place a piece of wood or table beneath the bone appropriately, for when you do this, it is prevented that the saw may cut into the corrupted flesh."
"And the sawing must be done little by little over that corrupted place because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear on its surface to the touch, then it will have to be sawn open again."
"If the bone is corrupted but not prominent, then one part is continuous with another and the corruption is in its middle or at some other part of it. Then uncover the flesh completely from all sides; next place wood beneath, and cut into that first part where the corruption is found until the sawing continues through to the other part."
"And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said."
"If the corruption is at the junction, then cut into that corrupted junction and saw through the bone where it continues with the other part."
"And if from the corruption it goes to the continuity of two junctions, then it is not in the bone but rather in the flesh."
"If the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless you must discover the corruption however it appears to you, then scrape it away and cleanse it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with every sinew make it straight if it does not oppose any vein or nerve."
You should know what kinds of chisels and saws are appropriate for cutting these bones, as they vary according to the location, preparation, size, fineness, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity of the bones; therefore, you must prepare suitable tools for each type of operation.
Know that this operation requires you to have knowledge about the type of tool you need; when you have extensive study and experience in the methods of this art, and are knowledgeable about the treatment of illnesses, then you will already know what is appropriate for each tool regarding every illness.
And you will find at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should have with their simple names, which you will use for your practice on others. **Saw shape:**
Otra manera de operar:
Otra forma de una gran operación
Forma de rayo El extremo de este rayo debe tener forma como la de una llave de estrella, y sus puntas deben ser como las puntas del Alfabeto Stegeman.
It is not necessary that they be confined to the heads of joints when they are corrupted or the mouth is very large.
"Forma de una hoja de afeitar pequeña"
"Hoja de afeitar ancha"
Otra forma de sierra adecuadamente hecha: que sea arqueada en su parte superior y afilada como un cuchillo de hierro, y su miembro inferior esté adecuadamente hecho como un punzón. Forma de él
Forma de hoja de afeitar con concavidad
Otra forma de hoja de afeitar sutil
Otra forma de hoja de afeitar con extremo curvado
Forma de hoja de afeitar pequeña parecida a una lengua
Otra forma menor de cortador
Otra forma de cortador; este parece una lanza y su extremo está serrado, se utiliza en muchos lugares en la relación de los huesos.
Forma de lanza adecuada para la relación de aquellos que son perforados por los huesos
Y su extremo es triangular y puntiagudo.
Y está hecho de hierro de la India, y así como todas las causas que hemos dicho de hojas de afeitar e instrumentos para hacer incisiones y sierras.
De la incisión de extremo puntiagudo y de la sierra de huesos.
Las extremidades se pueden perder por causas intrínsecas o extrínsecas. Si después de haber medicado la corruption y no ha habido curación, a veces la corrupción puede avanzar hacia el miembro sin ninguna causa aparente, entonces es necesario hacer una incisión en ese miembro dentro del hueso donde se encuentra la corrupción para que el malestar desaparezca mediante la muerte o la extirpación de la parte corrupta, que es el mayor defecto del miembro.
Y la señal de aquellos a quienes les ha ocurrido es que el miembro está hecho negro dentro donde sea cortado o quemado por fuego, ya sea porque se haya perdido la carne, o porque se haya perdido cerca de la negrura donde la podredumbre haya avanzado hacia el interior del miembro y haya alcanzado todo el cuerpo; entonces es necesario hacer una incisión en ese miembro.
Y así como, si la causa de la corrupción es una percusión provocada por algunas causas venenosas, como el escorpión marino, la víbora o la rata, entre otras cosas.
Y si la corrupción o la percusión se produce en la extremidad del dedo, entonces debes hacer una incisión en el dedo y no permitir que la corrupción avance hacia la mano.
Y así como si ocurre en la mano, entonces debes hacer una incisión en la raíz del pulgar y no permitir que la corrupción avance hacia el brazo.
Y si es en lugar de ese, entonces debes hacer una incisión en el brazo en la articulación del codo.
Y si pasa más allá de la corrupción y a veces se acerca al codo, entonces es la muerte del malestar. Y administrar cualquier otro medio para su cura sería una cantidad de virtud.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption enters within it, then you incise that into one of the joints.
And if the disease reaches the tip of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. But if it can enter into the anus, then you incise the buttock within the junction of the anus.
And if corruption has already reached the anus, then there is nothing else to do but let it run its course and allow the patient to die.
And the way to incise the member or cut it is that you stretch the ligament at the part where you want to make the incision, and stretch another ligament above the place. And extend one ligament to the parts outside, and extend another ligament on top of it; and separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments with a knife wide enough so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it should be incised or cut.
And it is necessary to cover the wounds with lint from all sides so that it does not touch the place where it was, and that proper healing and suppuration may occur.
But if bleeding occurs while performing the operation, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or put some powders that are able to stop the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then wrap the member with a bandage at the place where it is convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
And I tell you this that happened to a man on his foot, this incident which you and I are discussing, which is the fourth one, occurred to him on the blackness of his foot with burning that was like the combustion of fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepared to go ahead with the treatment since he was in such pain and burning on the member, and he incised that foot at the joint, and it healed well.
That corruption remained for many days on his finger of the hand indicated.
And then it came to me, and that superfluity began to spread around with what I had put on the hand for medicine, specifically the cleansing of his body; but the superfluity did not spread, instead it began to go towards another finger until it reached the hand.
And he asked me to incise his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the spreading of that superfluity, and more so since I feared the death of the incision of his hand, because the power of the disease was on the skin.
And even though he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that that man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have not written this narrative except in order to help with what can be learned from this disease, and that there may be significance for which it is significant and according to which it should be treated.
Concerning the treatment of sinuses and the quality of enemas with medications.
"When an abscess occurs on some fleshy member and the space of the abscess extends to form a collection of pus, and it is suddenly burst and perforated, and the pus exits from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it appears thin like a piece of cloth, and has not yet reached putrefaction, and does not impress itself on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not fistula."
"If however the space is prolonged until corruption impresses itself on some member, then it is called a fistula."
"And its treatment consists of cutting away that entire skin layer as it is turned up, especially when it is thin and looks like cloth, and ensuring that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption."
"But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and there is pus issuing from it, then you treat it with a clyster."
"And when considering the sinus, if it is large and the arm that comes out has a fetid odor, then you treat it with an Egyptian clyster made from oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, ground together into a vessel and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
"And then you take what is necessary of it and dissolve it in water and honey; and apply this to the sinus with a syringe, stretching the opening of the sinus, and leave the medication in it for about two hours."
"And then extract it with a sponge; do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the putrefaction removed."
"And sometimes it is washed with water of ashes when this medication is not present. And if you take the ash of grapes and put it on the water, then collect that and apply it to the sinus until you are satisfied that it is clean."
"And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or the water of ashes, then apply a clyster with warm water mixed with honey three times, and afterwards apply one with wine and honey mixed together, because it has the property of cleansing and washing away corruption; wine also helps adhere the sinus, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness."
"And once you have done this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been cleaned out, then apply a clyster with something that promotes flesh growth in it."
"And take some of the delicate diachylon and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, which you will use to wash the wound. Or you may also apply other medicaments and ointments that have properties that were already described in the treatise on ointments."
"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow for the insertion of the clyster tube, then gradually dilate it with a small iron instrument, pausing from time to time and applying Egyptian or basilicon ointment around it until it has been sufficiently dilated."
"And likewise, if the opening is too wide, then narrow it with a suture and leave enough space for the insertion of the clyster without any addition."
"And if the opening of the sinus from which the arm is elevated above is located below, then dry it with pus as close to the area where the arm passes in order to prevent coarctation and allow for greater movement of the arm."
"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus near the elbow using pus alone as you wish, then prepare the limb with preparations such that the arm moves freely according to your satisfaction and without any retention of the arm."
"However, that which is placed over the sinus opening should remain in place at all times to prevent anything from entering into it." "And so you may know if what runs from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested:"
And now consider the location of that sinew, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess.
And since your treatment is prolonged in this manner, you will see that the material placed over the opening of the sinew has already adhered or acquired some adherence. Therefore, three days later, gently detach it; but when you do detach it, immediately change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinew a rather long space has grown filled with subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it will be appropriate, for there are some people in whom the generation of flesh is slow in their wounds, and others in whom it occurs rapidly.
And if after many days it is still not possible to draw the sinew together, then you will know that the sinew has not adhered. But if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and prolonged as a result, then adjust the dryness of the medications; for even though the medications may be moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like thin ointment when there is an appropriate amount of addition of cypress resin.
And the last remedy that you should use is to take some thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil; then mix it with old vinegar according to its substance, and apply that ointment over the wound, using it gently.
And similarly in that action, when there is no ointment available, you may use honey instead. When it enters the wound and becomes thickened, then apply it gently. Or you can take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind all of them together and powder them over melted wax, and then spread this mixture on cloth and apply it to the sinew. Then spread that same honey which has been cooked until it thickens, powder it onto a cloth, and apply it gently to the sinew.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use long and sharp irises (and they are called irises) along with aloe vera and ground frankincense centaurium. Use these simple ingredients either separately or combined, grind them together and sift them, then powder them over the melted wax which has been cooked. Apply this mixture gently.
If the curve of the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, know that the corruption is in its head, and then make an inquiry among the bones or other hard members or ligaments. Then treat it with a fistula cure, as mentioned above.
To treat calluses, broken nails, and added digits by cutting them off and dividing them.
A callus is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the thumb or another finger, often growing larger on other fingers. When it prolongs and its treatment is less desirable, it is either a cauterized aposteme or corruption, which penetrates and corrupts the root of the nail. Sometimes it corrupts the entire digit, penetrating to the bone, causing a foul odor, and darkening the tip of the finger.
And so, when you have that which we have said in the division and your cure does not conform to it, then you must cut with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail and immediately cauterize the wound near it, because cautery is very helpful in this matter.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions to the nail begin to compress the flesh at its sides, causing pain and discomfort there, then you must carefully remove a thin layer of the angle of the nail that causes the pain, elevate it slightly, cut into the flesh easily with iron, and pause over what remains of the flesh with burning corrosive medicines until all is removed. Then cure it with ointment until it heals.
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you must cut into the bone and remove it, because no time will heal when the bone is corrupted.
And if sometimes the corruption and corruption spread to the finger, then you must cut into it at one of its joints according to how it is remembered, and cure it until it heals.
But if the nail receives percussion or friction and painful sensation occurs there, then you must first flebotomize the affected area. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom, making sure that the section does not reach the flesh near the nail. Otherwise, you will cause acute pain in the affected area due to the excessive, superfluous flesh becoming inflamed there. Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
A finger joint, which is born in many men, is often fleshy throughout and has a loud noise in the bones or a loud sound in the nail.
Some are born at the junction of the joint, or it is the birth of one of the joints of the said fingers. But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not harm, and this which is born at the junction is often painful.
And those that are born fleshy have an easy section, so you should cut into them with a wide spatula at their root.
But that which is born at the root of the joint has a difficult cure; therefore beware of its amputation.
But that which is born in a finger between the joints requires you to first cut into the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw it off with one of those suitable saws for this purpose and then treat it until it heals.
But the consolidation that occurs in the said fingers between their joints viewed or by nature of the person who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning with fire, or by likeness, then you must cut off that consolidation until the said return to their natural shape.
And then place between their skin layers of linen soaked in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them so that it may be consolidated as needed.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these fingers at the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Of incision of veins, there are three types.
Veins are varicose, and they are rolled-up thick veins full of superfluous black bile which come out onto the surface of the limbs of the body. They most often occur in the chambers, especially in those of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore you should administer purgation of the body with black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But their cure with iron is done in two ways: one way is to cut into them and draw out that black blood; the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The section of it is done in this way: first wet the chamber at its beginning with cold water until the thick blood is resolved, which is a kind of mucus from the chamber. Then bind the chamber of the affected person to the upper part of the thigh up to the lower part of the bone using a bandage. Then cut into the vein at one place or two or three with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with the tie-up hand from below the chamber outwards and upwards until as much blood as you desire has been let out and that will suffice for the virtue of the complaint.
And then ligature it, and command him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full, as needed for the patient.
But the raising of them is done in this way: you who shave the chamber of the affected person if it has hair on it and then put it in warm water. Then wet the chamber with cold water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or have him exercise strongly if there is no bath present, until the member becomes hot.
And then cut the cord in the right of the vein at its length or end near the bone, or at its lower part near the tendon.
And then tie the cord with hooks and strip off the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch. This is how you know its appearance when it inclines somewhat towards blackness.
And then after evacuating, tie that white string which is a cord.
And then place below it that red ray so that it may be elevated and removed from the cord and suspend it with a golden hook.
And then cut another incision nearby that incision at three places and then strip off the cord from above the vein until it appears.
And then raise it and cut into it with another incision near the tendon, and then extract it and raise it until it has been removed through the first incision. Then extract it from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you have extracted it from the incision that is above all the incisions so that all of it has been removed; and then close the wound.
And if you are unable to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and remove it, or place below it that red ray and turn your hand all around until it has been removed. And be sure not to break it for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate that vein and harm will come upon the patient through that injury.
And when all of it has been removed, then place over the wound soft wool moistened with rose oil and unguent and olive oil that is not rosy. Then care for him until he is healed
"And if the vein is constricted with a twist that requires unwinding at the affected parts, and it is not as straight as we have said, then you must cut through all the twisted parts of it and where it is coiled, and then raise it up using forceps."
"And be careful with your section so that you do not incise the vein and harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; therefore, use caution in this."
"Form of the incision where the vein is cut:"
"It is not too acute like the curved cuts and it does not have a sharp point so that it does not harm the vein; rather, it has sufficient thickness and flexibility, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; as we have said, there is some excess thickness in it."
"Extraction of the vein from the leg:"
"This vein is generated in the cavities in the tail areas, such as the one called 'Al-Atiq' in Arabic lands and in dry, barren lands with little tenderness where there is neither grass nor shrubbery."
"And sometimes it is generated in other places of the body besides the cavities."
"And its formation is due to corruption that comes from the tail, just like poison from within serpents and worms and crabs and worms generating between the tail and the flesh."
"And the sign of the suspicion of its arrival is from this vein that occurs in the cavity with violent inflammation; and around that place it becomes swollen, and from there begins to come out the vein that appears like a shrub."
"And then, when the extremity appears, it is necessary that you wrap around that one a lead weight whose weight is that of one sixth of a dragon, and knot it and leave the lead hanging from the cavity."
"And whenever some cause makes it go outside towards other parts, wrap that in lead and knot it." "And if it is not prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut that with a sharp edge inside because if you do, it will contract and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place and bad ulcers."
"Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gradually and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body, without leaving any cause of it inside the flesh."
"And some men have had this vein come out that is as long as twenty-four palms, and I have heard of one that was thirty palms."
"And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the ray into the wound of it and pierce that with a long probe along the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to that place for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses."
"And sometimes this vein has many branches, and especially when it appears at the junction of the thigh or in the thigh, and comes out with many openings, and each opening has its own branch."
"And then cure that as we have said in the division and with what is written above."
"Concerning cutting for worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine illness."
"This illness is named bovine madness in some lands because many times it appears in oxen and is rarely found in humans; it begins between the spine and flesh, spreading throughout the body, causing pain and weakness, and is evident through discomfort moving member to member until the spine breaks."
"Generation of it occurs by putrefaction of certain humors, like that which happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and ascariasis in the belly."
"It is feared because when it reaches the head and goes to the heart, it causes great trembling in the body and enters and destroys it; this happens many times."
"And therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, then its motion and appearance must be felt in the sensation; then you should grasp what is above it and what is below it with ligature and constraint, and press it dry and extract that."
"And if it is in the flesh and not on the surface, then you should apply a cautery with fire to the place where it resides; the greatest fear is corruption of it by which it corrupts the place, as we have said."
"And if you wish that being to reach the head near the heart, then grasp above the eyebrow with strong constriction and press it dry, extracting it; and the patient should cleanse his body with medicines that evacuate corrupt humors, avoiding foods that cause putrefaction."
"De Sectione Super Aegritudinem Naffir." This is a phrase in Latin that could be translated as "On the Operation Against the Disease Naffir." It appears to be a title for a medical text or a section of one, with "nafir" possibly being an Arabic term referring to some kind of ailment.
"This illness is called in our land 'nafir,' and it is pain that comes into certain members, and it changes from member to member." This suggests that "nafir" refers to an unspecified type of migrating pain or discomfort that affects different parts of the body. The use of "nostra terra" implies that this text was written in Catalan-speaking region.
"And you have already seen it as I will describe to you." This is a continuation from the previous sentence, indicating that the speaker assumes that the listener has some familiarity with the condition they are discussing and will now provide further details about it. "You were called to see a woman patient in a village, and you discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the elbow; after about an hour had passed, you saw that inflammation move like this: it went forward as if it were alive and moved from place to place, but rather slowly, as if it were liquid silver running here and there." This description suggests that the author witnessed a migrating inflammation or infection in the woman's arm vein.
"And then pain came from that place and it became fixed in the muscle; indeed it remained there for about an hour." This continues the description of the migrating inflammation: after moving around for some time, the pain eventually settled in a specific location, the muscle.
"And then it moved to the other side of the body and reached the other arm."
"And then recount to me how he turned around throughout his body according to what I saw; and he was too amazed by the change in him and the swiftness of member to member." "I had already seen something similar in my eyes according to that manner, however I saw much more pain being exchanged from member to member." "But I didn't see that in the eyes as with the woman."
"And you don't think it is because the woman was old, having a dry body and visible veins, and in this appearance there was that exchanged windiness."
"And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this recoil in those who are pleasing and have moist bodies with veins veiled."
"And as you wish the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to the eye as we have said, then you press upon him gently and cease suddenly and quickly over that spot where that choked windiness has exited, and cauterize the place."
"But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that with exercise of the body and with what drives out windiness, and treat those with stinking pills and pills of saffron and similar things."
"On Extraction of Arrows."
"Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they strike, for they differ in that some have large points, others small, concave, or blunt, which are solid; some have three edges, and others have tongues; still others have stars."
"And the signs of brain injury include: when an arrow strikes and penetrates the bone, and exits from the fontanelle which is above the brain, causing sudden intense pain, blindness, dizziness, ringing in the ears, inflammation, swelling of the tongue, confusion and vomiting bile. Then the speech is suddenly interrupted and destroyed, and a white humid fluid like dust comes out from the wound site, resembling the consistency of water."
"And therefore if you see these signs appear, then you should refrain from attempting treatment and removing the arrow unless it is external."
"But when an arrow strikes the heart near the left nipple and it is firmly embedded in hard flesh and not soft, then there will be a sudden decrease in pulse movement like that of blood. Then black blood flows from the wound site, chill spreads to the extremities, cold sweat appears on the forehead, fainting occurs; therefore know that death will come suddenly without warning."
"And when an arrow strikes the lung, there is frothy blood sputum from the wound site. The vessels near the neck become congested, the patient's complexion changes, and they exhale a large breath or gasp for air with great effort."
"And if an arrow strikes the pleura which is in the chest near the ribs, then there will be pain close to the little lungs. Then the breath becomes rapid with intense pain and sighing, and all the members of the muscles become rigid."
"And if an arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be vomiting of undigested food from the wound site."
"And if an arrow strikes the abdomen and is embedded within it, then there will be some opening of the wound site or tearing of tissue or intestine which is disrupted. There is no hope in the treatment nor extraction of the arrow."
"And if an arrow strikes the bladder and urine exits externally, then there will be leakage of urine from the wound site. Then there is sudden pain over the wound; therefore know that it is fatal."
"But other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spinal column, collarbone, thigh, knee and their counterparts are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not venomous."
"And I recommend this to you as something I have seen regarding these arrows, so that you may use it as guidance for your treatment."
"The reason is that when a man was struck by an arrow in the lachrymal bone of his cheek near the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side through the ear canal, he healed without any injury to his cheek."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the grey of his cheekbone near the eyelid. The arrow was already hidden and only a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft remained. It was a large, sharp arrow of the type used by the Turks, with a lion-shaped head that did not have ears."
"And the Jew healed without any harm or injury to his cheek."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck his throat. It was an Arabic arrow with ears on it. Then I incised over that between two guides and it was already submerged in his throat. Then I carefully extracted it with forceps and the Christian healed."
"And I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck his abdomen. I thought that he would die from it. But since thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to his good constitution, I incised over the arrow and extracted it with forceps, and he healed without any harm."
"I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back and the wound had healed over it. Then after about seventy years, the arrow was expelled from the root of his thigh."
"I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her abdomen and the wound healed over within it. Her condition did not change in any way, and she did not suffer harm to any of her natural functions."
"I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face and the wound had healed over and the arrow head had broken off without causing much pain. Many others are similar to this."
"I extracted the arrow from the chief of the king's guards which had struck him in the middle of his nose and had already deviated slightly to the right. The entire arrow was hidden."
"And I was called for his treatment almost immediately after the wound from the arrow entry happened within three days."
"And then I withdrew the arrow from the wound very carefully; and then I examined it with my subtle fingers, but did not feel it; yet he felt its puncture left behind in his right ear."
"I applied the plaster to the place with healing and digestive power, ensuring that the location was accurate so as not to appear too close to the arrow's wound."
"No accident occurred at the site where the arrow had pierced it; I continued applying the plaster there for several days without any accidents occurring. Meanwhile, the wound healed and the patient's condition improved over many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recalled this to me."
"And then I applied a caustic corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up. And with my fingers I examined that, and withdrew the tip of the arrow gently, which adhered to the shaft."
"And then I applied the caustic medicine to the opening of the wound until I saw clearly the tip of the arrow appear. And I spent time on this for the space of four months."
"And then after the wound had healed and I was able to introduce tweezers into it, and hold it firmly without causing any damage, at that point I ceased my subtle efforts and ingenuity on that matter. And one day I began to extract it using tweezers made of down feathers according to the method described later in this chapter. After extracting it, I restored the wound."
"And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the patient was cured entirely without any lingering issue."
"And I tell you this story about the extraction of some arrows because it may serve as an example and indication of what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood by mere narration nor comprehended by this book alone."
"And the wise craftsman compares little things with great ones, and that which is present with that which is absent. And he finds new operations and new instruments necessary for the descent of foreign causes when they occur."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members into which they have pierced except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it has entered, or by the contrary movement of the other part."
"And that which is ejected by the place where it entered is either an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is thrown out."
"And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it is cut, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated."
"And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat the attempt each day with attraction and movement, and it will be ejected."
"And if it still does not obey extraction after some days, then you must bore around the arrow in that bone with a subtle drill until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it."
"But if the arrow has already disappeared into the flesh and is hidden from sensation, then you should search for it with a probe. And if you feel it, then attract it with suitable instruments for attracting it."
"And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein in its way, then open up the wound until it is widened enough for the arrow to be extracted."
"And if the ear has been pierced with which it is held, then cut away the flesh in which it is embedded on both sides using all your skill; and work on that, whether you can accomplish the removal of the flesh in a fracture of the ears or in torsion of those until you succeed."
"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow wherever it may be, then use torsion of your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys. And do so with utmost subtlety that the arrow is not broken and that it can be extracted with ease."
"And if you cannot succeed in extracting it at that time, then leave it for some days until the surrounding wounds have healed, and then try again when it has eased." "But if you encounter difficulty in the flow of blood, then administer what we have said regarding treatment in its chapter."
"And preserve your skill in incising veins or nerves or sinews, and use ingenuity in every possible way to remove the arrow. And do so with ease, calmness, slowness, and steadfastness as I have mentioned and recommended."
"And thus when you contract the arrow for that purpose, the illness will follow the figure according to which the case of the arrow entered it, for it is more beneficial." "But if this is not possible, then administer what is possible according to the figures."
"But if arrows are ejected due to the other side being opened, or if some wound has already occurred in those surrounding it, or if there is swelling around the tip of the arrow due to inflammation above the wound and its emergence is prominent, then cut into that. And make the section according to the amount which the forceps grasp; and then attract it, for it will be easy to extract."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb in opposition until the arrow presses on the bone, and widen it from both sides, and then extract it."
"And otherwise leave it for several days, and then try again until it is ejected."
"And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it out with it."
"But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer impulse, then insert that [the concave instrument] if it is blunt, such that its concavity enters the end of the arrow, and then push it out with it."
"But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow will be eased by that."
"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh in which there is a vein, if this is possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate."
"And if the arrow has struck bone, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close such that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut into it, then cut into it and guard against incision of veins or nerves, and extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed."
"Form of forceps upon which arrows are drawn:"
"The ends of them resemble the beak of a bird, which is made serrated when they grasp the arrow in order not to let it slip."
"And of those there are many kinds: large ones for larger arrows, few ones for smaller arrows, and medium ones according to the size and thickness of the feather."
"Like a reed, so that it may ease the insertion into the concave arrow and be propelled with it."
"Of phlebotomy of veins."
"The veins for phlebotomy are thirty in number, of which sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears called 'aurels'; two herbs appearing on both temples; two veins in the ducts of both eyes called 'aspicients'; a vein prepared at the middle of the forehead and another at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins above the upper lip, two veins below the lower lip (these are called 'algelics'), and two veins on either side of the tongue." "However, the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five: of these one is cephalic and is located on the wild side (the outer side); the people call it 'the vein of the head'. The median vein is also called 'midline vein', and is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. The basilica is a vein that is located on the domestic side (inner side) of the arm, and is called 'cubital' or 'elbow vein' by common people. The funis of the arm is paused above the elbow and is that one in which phlebotomy is performed; it appears prominently over the pulse. The savatella is the vein that is between the auricular and the little finger, and has two branches."
"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is located on the outer curvature of the ankle on the wild side (outer side); the second is the saphenous vein, whose location is behind the knee on the domestic side (inner side); the third is the sciatic vein, whose location is behind the knee on the wild side (outer side). There are other veins in the leg similar to these."
"The benefit of phlebotomizing the veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraines, sciatica, and ulcers of the head, especially those that are chronic."
"And the quality of bleeding these veins is according to what you consider appropriate for the patient: it should be done on the crown of the head, and the head should be wiped with a cloth on both temples using gentle friction. Then, press the patient's neck with a bandage that covers the two locations where the veins are close to the ears in two depressed areas of the head. Use your index finger to locate them, and if you feel their pulse with your finger, then proceed carefully."
"Then, take the lancet called 'cutter', which is the one that incises, and insert it into the vein in the elbow until blood begins to flow out." "And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards and incise the vein with an incising incision." "The length of the incision should be equal to two fingers' width or thereabouts; and let as much blood flow out as desired."
"And apply powder and bandage that which has been healed."
"It has already been mentioned at the beginning of this book the incision of those and their cauterization."
"The benefit of phlebotomy on the two arterial veins that are in the temples is for ancient migraine, persistent headache and frequent eyestrain, and sharp pains in the chest due to excessive blood flow to the ears."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is as I advise you: constrain the patient's head with a cloth until both veins appear clearly to the touch and demonstrate their pulse under your fingers; and then proceed with caution."
"And then you raise the chain above the vein at its division with your index finger, insert the bleeding lancet into it, lift the vein upwards and cut it thus as you have done in the other two veins; let as much blood flow out according to your need."
"And then release the bandage from the patient's head, and keep your finger on the vein for an hour, then press over that cut with cotton and powder, and strengthen it above with a tight constraint, and leave it alone until it is healed."
"And as mentioned at the beginning of this book, the memorandum of them and their incision, and attraction has already been preceded."
"And therefore, the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is especially for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases and migraine and stiffness and foul ulcers."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I advise you: so that the patient ties their head with a bandage until the vein appears; and then takes the instrument called 'fossor', which has this shape:"
"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the 'fossor' onto that vein and puncture it with a quick movement or another cause in its manner, and let as much blood flow out as you wish; then release the perforation from the patient's head and tie it up until it is healed."
"And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy, but it does not need to be very pointed like the other phlebotomies, because if it were too sharp, it could break through the bone and cause injury when using the phlebotomy if it is too thin."
"But the benefit of the two veins that are near the lachrymals of both eyes for scurf of the eyelids due to inflammation and sebum in the eyelids, and facial diseases."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient ties their head with a bandage, and then performs it, and you stand over the patient's head."
"And the phlebotomy should be done across slightly along its length with a little phlebotomy knife, because there is not much flesh in that location; and if the phlebotomy knife is too thin, it could break through its tip."
"And then let the blood flow out as much as you need, and press on that cut, and tie it up for one night, and then release it."
"But the phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent colds, and facial diseases such as migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that the patient ties their head and then places their nose in your left hand, and takes a long thin phlebotomy knife and inserts it into the middle part of the top of the nose straightaway, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because blood begins to flow soon."
"You should withdraw your hand slowly with the phlebotomy knife and let the blood flow according to your need; then tie it up for one night, because that vein is easily restored."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both tendons is for contraction of the eye and the onset of leprosy, and many diseases such as elephantiasis and destructive ulcers such as herpes."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that each patient ties one side of their head with a bandage; and the operator stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat."
"And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with a wide, thin phlebotomy knife slowly; and then let out blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what seems necessary at that time; and do the same for the other vein."
"And then untie the bandage and tie both veins with a midrib tourniquet so that the patient is not fainted, and leave them overnight because the wound will be healed by tomorrow."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins of the armpits is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gum decay, and destructive ulcers and fissures, as well as destructive ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on them is that you make the patient sit before you, and tie their head with a bandage, then turn back their lips and look for two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left; and their demonstration is by the darkness of each of both, and especially because around there are small dark veins; and then incise each one with an oblique incision."
"But if there is doubt about which of them it is, and you do not know which one it is, then make the incision on the larger one of them, and the one with the more evident pus."
"And do the same for both veins that are on the upper lips."
"But among the two veins that are under the tongue, the benefit of phlebotomy is especially for syncope that occurs in the throat, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth."
"And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you make the patient stand between your hands before the sun, and raise their tongue, and look underneath it on one side of the vein and on the other side the vein, and each color is tending towards darkness."
"And then phlebotomize each one; but be careful not to withdraw your hand while phlebotomizing those veins, because below them are arteries."
"And your veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are commonly found in all men, and phlebotomy on them is done in two ways: either they are punctured with a mulberry-shaped or olive-shaped phlebotomy knife with decreasing thinness; or they are cut with a scalpel-like phlebotomy knife, and it is called 'if necessary'; this is its form:"
"It should be like this on one side as often as possible, and it is suitable for opening concave veins that are full of blood appearing thickly, and those that contain turbid thick blood."
"And this phlebotomy knife is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain clear yellow blood."
"Yet the remedy of phlebotomy on the basilica vein, which is one of three veins, extracts blood from illnesses that are below the throat and collar, and helps reduce swelling in the feet and belly."
"And tell the phlebotomist to be careful when performing phlebotomy on that [area], and to be especially cautious, for there is an artery nearby. If they err in puncturing with the phlebotomy needle, they may cut that artery and cause a flow of blood."
"And if the basilica is not visible by manifest appearance, then you should abandon that and move to another one, searching for some branch vein. You should phlebotomize at the end of the arm instead, as that is more visible."
"But if you wish to phlebotomize at the elbow, then you should first locate the arm's crease where you know the pulse point is located. Then, carefully place your finger there with the fleam; raise the arm and cut the vein at a concave angle using an alnessil fleam as we have described before. Be sure to avoid percussion within some space of the artery location."
"And when you press with strength on the limb, if there is inflation in the area where you have placed your finger with the fleam, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
"And if the blood flows in a phlebotomy like a child's urine stream, then know that it is artery blood. Then you should compress and pause your finger over that area for some time; then lift your finger and if the bleeding stops, many times it does stop, then strengthen the arm and abandon it."
"And guard the wound from moisture of the air, and avoid overheating or overcooling it for a few days until it is healed."
"But if the bleeding does not stop, and you realize that there is no present medicine for this, then cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity of the limb will be contracted, and the bleeding will be stopped. Or else take some lint soaked in egg white, and apply it there, then take a bandage and bind it over the area of the vein with pressure downwards using liniment and powder for another day."
"And then if the bleeding has stopped, good. But if not, then cure it with that which is mentioned before regarding the location of the powders causing bleeding."
"And the arresting of bleeding from there can be difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of swelling of the limb."
"But regarding the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for removing blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
"And beware of the phlebotomist who performs phlebotomy on it, for below that is a nerve. And therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, and perhaps not completely healed. This nerve often appears during sensation; but sometimes it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not show itself. Therefore you should pause the phlebotomy with which you are performing it with an alnessil section, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length."
"The benefit of phlebotomy on the temporal vein is that it draws blood from the head, relieving illnesses of the eyes."
"And now the question is, if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive or myrtle lancet; for this vein is the safest of all, as it does not leave behind any artery nor nerve."
"But often an abscess forms in some men if they are not phlebotomized during the first percussion, but rather touched there."
"The first one is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the conservation of health and with hope of recovery and caution against approaching illnesses, and that it should be done in one of the veins on the head, which are: cephalic, dark, and basilisk; and that phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and around meals in winter when there are signs of repletion."
"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or even earlier than that, as long as three hours have passed since the beginning of the day."
"But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it causes convenience and necessity for it, whether now or later, at any hour and at all times."
"And it should not be done in children under the age of fourteen, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month is over, and elderly people who have already passed seventy years should not be phlebotomized."
"And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for whatever reason, it is necessary that they clean their bowels beforehand with a lion's clister, especially if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the cleaned bowels, which are pure, and do not harm the principal members."
"And patients who are in sacred fasting or drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until they have recovered from their illness or drunkenness, nor those suffering from dropsy. And phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, near abdominal pain, near multiplication of coitus, work, exercise, fasting vigilance, and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether bodily or animal."
"And before phlebotomy, consider the subtlety of humors beforehand, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so."
"And before phlebotomy, if there is no prohibition due to some cause or weakness, one should bathe or exercise somewhat so that the blood may be subtilized."
"And pause phlebotomy in the afternoon of the day, especially around the hour of Terce, as we have said."
"And perform it in such a way that the time of that day is guarded from all animal accidents such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents such as work, unnecessary pain, coitus, and similar things."
"And at the same time, let the causes be present in the use of which men are accustomed with aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things according to the quantity that is possible."
"And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the patient who is to be phlebotomized."
"And first, extend your arm, and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it twice."
"And let the ligature be moderate, for if it is too tight, it prevents the flow of blood, and if it is too loose, it causes superfluity of blood. And if it is moistened, it hinders the course of the blood altogether."
"And then, while tightening the ligature, let the patient rub their hands together so that the veins become inflated and are clearly felt."
"And then, the phlebotomist should anoint the phlebotomy instrument with a little ancient oil properly; and then place his left index finger on that vein where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein may yield a little, and the percussion may be more precise because among veins there is one that appears like a fleeing chord before phlebotomy, and among those is the one that is full of windiness, and when the phlebotomy instrument is placed on it, it contracts before the phlebotomy instrument, and the phlebotomist becomes uncovered; and the phlebotomy instrument does not pierce the vein, and if it does pierce, then the vein is narrow."
"And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be steady and attentive to all these causes."
"And then remove the phlebotomy instrument, but if the vein is not filled in one attempt, it is better to repeat it on another vein nearby or above it with haste, if that place is not inflamed."
"If that place is inflamed or the illness worsens, then you should leave it for one day or two and do not tighten the ligature, lest it draw out an inflammatory boil, nor should you bathe."
"And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
"If the opening is small and blood flows out subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then you should repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to the rules and adjust the opening a little, and do this with haste before that place becomes inflamed, for many men become inflamed even with a small opening."
"But if that place is already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, for you have no cause to excuse yourself. And instead, apply some of the oil from the wound, for it alleviates the course of blood." "And it is better here to use olive oil rather than other oils."
"Similarly, administer oil wound on all phlebotomies where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow. And they do this with tyriaaca alfarca and sagzenea when pausing one of those over that place, for blood is subtilized and revolved when it is thick."
"If a large boil has formed at the site of phlebotomy, as often happens, especially in those who have not been bled before or whose vein opened little, then you should cauterize it and apply a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly scraped, to that place for an hour, for it dissolves."
"And this should be done immediately after the bleeding of that vein with completion of it or another vein."
"If there remains in that place for some days any blackness or greenness, do not worry about it. And if you wish, apply to that place some of the following: aloen and myrrh dissolved, or some of the juice of mint or calendula or similar."
"And many times it happens that boils and elevations occur due to phlebotomy at the basilica (temple)."
"Therefore, place your hand over that (elevation), and if you happen to feel softness under your compression there, then know that that elevation is harmful and bad; and therefore guard yourself to apply some of what we have said there, for a lot of blood flows from the artery."
"Apply a plaster containing astringents to make the area firm, then treat it with another remedy until it heals."
"It is necessary to withdraw blood from each person according to their strength and the prevailing color that appears over the blood."
"If the blood is dark, allow it to flow until it becomes red; likewise if it is thick, allow it to flow until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is alleviated."
"It is necessary for someone who is full and strong with a need for bloodletting in one session to have the venipuncture incision widened, and the incision should be broad."
"For the frail person, do the opposite [of what was said above], and it is necessary to withdraw blood from them in several sessions, with a narrow incision."
"It is better for venipuncture to be performed as a transverse section, not a puncture."
"This manner of venipuncture preserves blood flow and avoids nerve incisions. It is more praiseworthy and safer than venipunctures made horizontally or vertically."
"If syncope occurs during bloodletting, you should care for the patient beforehand by giving them a small piece of bread infused with chamomile or simple rosemary tea to drink. Then withdraw blood from them in three or four sessions."
"If there is coldness of the complexion, then before bloodletting take bread infused in myrrh essence or aromatic honey essence seasoned with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or a highly fragrant aromatic essence."
"If syncope occurs during bloodletting due to the loss of too much blood, then you should give them water of flesh and a highly fragrant subtile honey essence to drink. Use aromatics with lavender, and bind their forehead with it."
"And use the other causes that have been mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope due to evacuation."
"For those who want to raise their arm and dissolve their blood on the second occasion, if venipuncture is done for too much evacuation, then it should be done in small amounts gradually according to the strength of the person over continuous days."
"For those who want to raise their arm and dissolve their blood on the second occasion, if their body is strong, then they should do it about seven or nine hours after the first venipuncture."
"For those who want to remove blood from their body contrary to the direction of the sun's movement, it should be done on the second or third day."
"But in a body where much blood has already been shed and is acute and causes fever, it should be removed from the body in one session, with a large amount removed, increasing the aperture until syncope occurs. Be sure to keep all conditions of venipuncture; place your hand on the pulse of the body while removing blood to prevent death instead of syncope, for many deaths occur due to ignorance and negligence."
"And when you want to release the arm and evacuate blood on the second occasion, if the opening of the vein is already closed and it's difficult to draw blood, then press on that area with force and slightly bend the arm to extend it. This is not good."
"Leave the area alone until it can be venipunctured again. Or remove what has coagulated of the blood in the opening of the vein with the sharpness of the flebotomist. Or apply theriac or sageseed and press lightly on that area until the blood is completely evacuated."
"If the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"If it is necessary to provoke bloodletting secondarily, then you shall do so on that spot or in another vein."
"The vein called 'funis of the arm' is opened in place of the basilica or cephalic veins when they are not visible or concealed because it consists of those."
"The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should immerse their hand in cold water while the tourniquet tightens and until the vein appears prominently."
"Thus it is recommended to stretch over that area with firm pressure along the midline, avoiding lateral or longitudinal incisions."
"And make sure your incision is wide and when you perform bloodletting on that area above the wrist, do so gently."
"If bleeding is not flowing freely, then immerse your hand in cold water again and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have achieved your goal."
"But if it is summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and in winter, the flow of blood is slowed down by cold water."
"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins because it has neither a pulse nor nerves."
"Bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases."
"The quality of bloodletting from that area is to press the hand with a bandage or your hand, after immersing it in cold water until the vein is inflated and clearly visible; then incise it transversely; if you cut too deep, it will be difficult to stop the bleeding."
"And take care not to press your hand during bloodletting because that is where the nerves are exposed without flesh."
"And immerse your hand in cold water again and allow the blood to flow into it because if you do not immerse it in cold water again, the blood will coagulate in the incision of the vein and prevent free flow."
"After extracting blood according to the required quantity, then apply oil and salt over the vein so that it does not heal too quickly; do the same for any other wound."
"But the benefit of bloodletting from this vein is that it helps digestive diseases."
"And do likewise in the bloodletting of this one as you did with the other."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the median vein is for diseases that are located below the waist such as menstrual disorders, retention of menses, and skin diseases like scrofula and old wounds."
"And the quality of bloodletting from this vein is that the patient should immerse their foot in cold water and rub it until the veins appear clearly; then tie a bandage around the junction of the foot; the location of the vein can be seen near the ankle, where it branches into several smaller veins on the surface of the foot."
"And therefore bloodlet from the largest branch or one near the heel below the ankle joint because it is better and safer."
"And if you perform bloodletting on the surface of the foot, beware of the nerves that are located there and pause your bloodletting once you have made a transverse incision as deep as you wish to go."
"And that is how bloodletting should be done."
"But if bleeding is prohibited, then immerse the foot in cold water again and allow the blood to flow into it until evacuation is complete."
"And if the bloodletter makes a mistake on the first attempt, then try again a little further away because the location is safe; do not fear too much bleeding, but rather beware of the nerves as mentioned before."
"And do likewise for the median vein of the other foot."
"And as for the sciatic vein, its location is behind the ankle joint on the outer side of the leg."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from this vein is for hip pain when it is caused by heat."
"And the quality of bloodletting from this vein is that the patient should sit in a warm bath and hurriedly and tightly wrap a long thin bandage around their thigh on the outer side of the hip above the ankle for about four finger breadths because that is where it appears."
"And therefore when it appears, then bloodlet from there according to each person's ability and across the transverse incision is better; or incise that vein with an incision or cut it with scissors because its location is safe."
"And this vein is more abundant in men than women. And if you cannot find it, then bloodlet some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot near the heel and the little toe."
"And beware of the nerves and let out as much blood as you want."
"After that, untie the bandage and apply pressure to the wound site and compress it tightly because it heals quickly."
"On wind and on the qualities of using them."
"Winds are of four kinds: north, south, east or west."
"And bloodletting is done in two ways: one is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is bloodletting without scarification."
"And this bloodletting without scarification is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire."
"And the locations where bloodletting is administered with scarification and blood extraction are fourteen in number, of which:
"The purpose of venesection is not to extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, as this does not release the virtue through them, like flebotomy; nor is it necessary for venesection to be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused bypletion until the entire body is evacuated."
"However, venesection may be necessary to treat disease or continuously, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of it and at any other time."
"And therefore, in any cause of those mentioned, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command venesection to be done after two or three hours have passed since the beginning of the day."
"And it is beneficial to venesect the nape of the neck when there is heat in the head and pressure on the eyes, but care must be taken that this is accompanied by evacuation of the whole body."
"And this venesection is located at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein."
"And it is not lawful to use it in those who are of full habit or in whom there is catarrh, for it causes great harm."
"And therefore it should not be used on the old, and on the heads of those with hot diseases."
"But it is said that continuing this causes forgetfulness, therefore you should command the one performing venesection to pause his hand a little while holding the cup at the party lines of the veins, so as to prevent generation of forgetfulness."
"But venesection of the right arm is in the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lung, and splitting of the lungs' instrument, and coughing, andpletion."
"And therefore it is necessary that venesection on the right arm be a little delayed, for if it is paused at the party lines it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
"And venesection of the left arm causes accidental pains in the head and opacity of the eyes, migraine, and inflammation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is located at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
"And you should command the one performing venesection not to press his hand at the scarification, so as not to incise the artery and cause a flow of blood."
"And venesection of the left cheek causes coldness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and the appearance of diseases that are in the mouth, and it is located at the site of phlebotomy of the left helic vein which is on both lips."
"But venesection that is done over both spatulas causes headache, which is caused bypletion of heat."
"And venesection of both sides of the cheekbones causes benefit from phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins, for it attracts blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins of other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins."
"And command the one performing venesection not to proceed with scarification, for the site is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries beneath it."
"And it is a venesection in which one is venesected over the hips, and it causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are there."
"And you should command the one performing venesection to make it large and of iron, for the site requires a strong section; and strong pressure is attracted by subtle venesections, and it should be scarified with scarification."
"But venesections of the calves diminish by diminution manifestly, for they attract blood from all the body, and they cause old pains in the loins and belly, and the bladder; and they provoke menses, and they cause dropsy and edema; and they are located at the site of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, one left cavernous vein, and two lesser cavil veins."
"But they greatly debilitate the whole body and cause syncope in many men."
"And from venesections of the left cavernous vein, the benefit is near to the benefit of venesections of both calves."
"And the quality of the position of venesections is that one pauses the venesection at the beginning, draws it out, and then continues with moderate suction, and does not prolong the position of the venesections but pauses them lightly and remains them gently, so that humors come to the site by equal arrival." "And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the site already reddened and swollen, and that the color of blood appears."
"And then scarify and iterate suction little by little, and consider carefully the disposition of the body."
"For that man who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scarify him once and not more, so that the site is not ulcerated."
"And command the one performing venesection to widen the scarification a little and press gently, and temper the suction with ease."
"And if there is thickness in the blood, then you should scarify twice, for in the first time the way of subtilection to the blood and the wateriness of it is opened." "But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired by examination."
"And if the blood is very fetid, then there should be no scarification on the third time so that it succeeds lastly."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, one scarification suffices us."
"And if we want to extract much blood, we scarify with many scars; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with a pressed scarification."
"And the term of scarification in which only the depth of the cut is considered is when one presses upon the skin with the middle joint of the finger until it reddens, but without drawing blood."
"And if the skin of one is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites of the cups be anointed with lenient, opened, resolved oils; if it is in summer time, thus as oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of mallows seeds, or oil of camomile flowers; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lilies, or oil of chamomile flowers, or blood, and to those similar."
"And if the superfluity is thick and fiery, then the oil should be amaranthine, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or aneth oil, and to their similars."
"But if the person performing venesection has large pores with tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and that for this one the sites of cups near the venesection should be washed with warm or hot water of salt, or water of chamomile flowers, or water of borragem, and similars to those."
Guessed Translation: Those whose blood is of great humidity, wash their breath with vinegar or water mixed with myrtle and sumac.
Guessed Translation: For those whose excesses are abundant, wash their breath with old vinegar, or water of sanjus (savory), or decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and similar ones.
Guessed Translation: It is necessary that exhalation be guarded before bathing; sometimes it should be administered approaching the bath for one or two hours, and sometimes it should sleep near exhalation.
Guessed Translation: What is necessary so that the breath of a phlebotomized person may be regulated before breathing exercise.
Guessed Translation: At the beginning one should consider: if the breather or the one who needs phlebotomy is choleric and has hot blood with inflammation, then they should take cooling causes, such as sour pomegranates, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, julep, and similar ones.
Guessed Translation: Pause their foods such as poletts (young pigeons), roasted birds, and foods seasoned with sour ones, and similar ones.
Guessed Translation: And for the one whose constitution is cold, it is necessary that they take to drink essarop of almonds or essarop of fennel seeds and sumac, and sweet musk between young and old; and that they are recommended to use little drinking and eating, and pause foods like poletts (young pigeons), cannabis, fish, small birds, and pigeon.
Guessed Translation: And it is necessary that on the day of breathing exercise and phlebotomy drinking should be greater than eating.
Guessed Translation: And it is necessary to give in drinking at some hours for certain people triaca alhacena or musk medications, such as muscaded or alcelita before breathing exercise or phlebotomy or close by, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood may be subtiliated; and they should not take those scalpets.
Guessed Translation: Most breathing exercises that are not scarifications are breathing exercises that are paused on the liver, and on the spleen and podagra, and on the navel, in the locations of the kidneys and the armpit of the arm, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them.
Guessed Translation: And it is not sought by those but attraction of blood from member, such as paused breathing exercise on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that for dissolving cold viscousness of the member, such as paused on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scalps it and relieves pain because it resolves ventosity.
Guessed Translation: And it is paused on the nostrils when it happens in their obstruction or phlegm because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out opacity and eradicated phlegm from its location.
Guessed Translation: And similarly it does when it is paused on the liver and spleen to resolve ventosity in those enclosed.
Guessed Translation: And these breathing exercises are administered widely with suction alone; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
Guessed Translation: And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in illnesses of the spleen.
Guessed Translation: And this is why the breathing exercise should be filled and made greater, it is cold water alone or water in which certain herbs have been cooked for that purpose.
Guessed Translation: Form of breathing exercise administered with fire: the width of the opening should be two fingers wide according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of breath should be half a palm; and it should be on the side of him, in the location that is in the circuit, half his height; and the traction should be small according to the quantity that enters him like a needle.
Guessed Translation: It should be made of wormwood or citron, with thick margins, lion's ear, mulberry leaves and fig leaves so that it does not hurt the member by its position upon it.
Guessed Translation: And there should be in the middle of it a transverse tongue of wormwood or iron where the candle is paused with fire.
Guessed Translation: And this breathing exercise should be much greater than that which we have recommended; and the pause should be less according to the illnesses and condition of him who uses it.
Guessed Translation: The breathing exercises of feeble and emaciated people are different from those of young and stout ones.
Guessed Translation: And the quality of pausing this breathing exercise with fire on the member is that one should extend the heat with fire of decently burnt wood before a small candle of wax, and pause it on the middle of the transverse tongue in the middle location of the breathing exercise, so that the fire may be kindled around the edge of the opening so that not burn the skin of the sick person.
Guessed Translation: And promptly it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and the finger should be on the traction that we have said, while when we hold the breathing exercises and do not need to stretch the finger and make the vapor rise over that traction, then the breathing exercise will soon be dissolved.
Guessed Translation: And quickly relight the heat according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
Guessed Translation: More in the breathing exercise that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse tongue nor traction, and it is not administered but only filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone.
Guessed Translation: And this is its form: This breathing exercise, the larger it is, the better, for it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVI
Guessed Translation: Bloodletting is not administered on most members but on those in which it is impossible to place breathing exercises due to their smallness, such as the hand and gum and similar ones; or on member devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar ones.
Guessed Translation: And the quality of using those that if they are found, the blood-suckers should be in the waters of pools clean and clear.
Guessed Translation: And promptly they should be placed day and night in water clear until they are hungry, and that no remnant remains in the belly of those; and promptly the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and breathing exercises; and promptly rub the member of the sick person until it reddens; and promptly pause them on it.
And when they are full, discard them.
If suction from the location with a breathing exercise is possible, it is more preferable in healing.
And if not, then wash the location with vinegar and promptly with much water; and rub and squeeze it out.
If the body of blood is prolonged promptly at the cutting off of the blood-suckers and it is abundant, then you should put a cloth dipped in hot water on it, and pause that on top until the oozing is absorbed.
If the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle on it sublimated vitriol, or gallstones and similar ones of the styptic causes until the blood is cut off; or pause on the location many dried broad beans, and lay them there until the beans adhere to the location, and the blood is cut off.
And it is necessary, if necessary, repetition of bloodletting when it is possible to change those [blood-suckers].
And if blood-suckers are prohibited from suspension, then rub the location with fresh blood or insert a needle in the locations until it draws out blood; and promptly pause them there, for those [blood-suckers] when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them a little of sublimated alum, or salt, or ashes, and they will fall off promptly.
Thus begins the procedure of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it concerns the reduction of fractures and dislocation accidents in the bones.
Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and laypeople boast about this chapter and those who at some time did not consider the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And because of this reason it happens that this method is hidden among the learned in our land; and you are not oblivious to this at any time whatsoever; and I have not added what follows except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, so as to extract knowledge from them.
And thus I direct you towards experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my knowledge and on which my experience has been passed; since here I have summarized it for you other [and] delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and have summarized it at the end of summarizing; and have shown it at the end of declaration; and have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter one
Summary and collections from the fractures of bones, from those which are necessary before we begin to remember the members that have been broken and various, if any. Therefore, I will say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my speech and the chapters whose understanding at the beginning is forced upon the craftsmen and those who are diligent about the truth of them; thus it is you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art besides you.
And thus I say that when there occurs some fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, at that time you must begin with flebotomy on him or let him bleed, or sometimes both, if no prohibition prevents it, such as debility of virtue or if he is an infant, or old in decrepitude, or it is a time of great heat or cold.
And thus it should be content with its food of fresh herbs and of flesh of birds and of crabs; and prohibit coarse meats and foods that are stuffing, especially those that fill the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of cauterizing an aposteme, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And at this time return the sick person to his first regimen with which he is accustomed to live.
And thus when the bone begins to be restored, at this time the sick person should be passed foods nutritive of much and coarse nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh cheese, and thick wine and similar to them; and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is done more lightly and better.
And know that the bones of those who are in their first vigor and the elderly do not have the possibility to be reunited and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members of them.
But however nature adjusts and connects over the broken bone of any part whatsoever, glutinous cause similar to glue that adheres and strengthens that until it is conglutinized and let together, until there comes the end of fortitude and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, except for some cause prohibiting it from its work.
And because of this reason, it is necessary that you suspend the foods of the sick person, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among them.
And I come with memory of each species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others.
Great diversity even within itself [the bone]. And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified among themselves; for an arched fracture occurs other than those that happen in it like stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are called spiral fractures and stellar and additional ones and non-additional ones, as it happens in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a fissure fracture.
And for each species there is some torment or proper suffering in its restoration according to what will come later, remembered distinctly in their places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone And by this is known a fracture of the bone: its tortuosity and its prominence and depression to the touch, and it is like that when you compress it with your hand.
And thus when there is no apparent tortuosity nor is it done with your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the sick person does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It can happen that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand and compress all of it; but pause over it with the medications of which memory will be made at that moment which is convenient for the place; and especially let there be streightness by subtle strictness.
And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or other than those that happen in the spiral ones, when all the part of its comparison is removed, then you should begin immediately to rectify it having had an abscess cauterized on it.
And if there is an abscess cauterized on it, then let it be left for a few days until the abscess ceases; and especially lift it according to each manner that you can of elevation and torment.
And know that the restoration and healing of it is lighter than of the bone in which such a fracture has happened.
And especially strengthen it according to what will come later, remembered about it.
But if there are spiral fractures, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and the hand.
And let your position be such that you hold the member where it is twisted according to its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you should strive to return those additions with torment and according to whatever manner you can in their places.
And beware, according to your skill, that you do not cause harm to the sick person by your operation on them nor injury; and strive, according to your ability, to apply one bone to its companion in their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand and if there is any different cause here, correct it and lift it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause abscesses to form because of their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen because of the operation of many of them.
The quality of the fracture of the broken limb is such that I recommend, so that you know that the broken limbs are varied in their smallness and greatness and in their shape.
Of those that are small, such as the arm or finger, and similar to them, then the bandage should be made of very soft cloth.
But those that are large like the thigh or calf, then in them there should be a bandage of linen and hard material, because the linen binds strongly and holds the limb together with strict compression on all sides without causing injury.
And first, first begin, first the evacuation of urine, pause conveniently there above the location of that fracture with three bandages or four according to how much the limb deserves; and strongly press with your hand using the bandage.
And then go to that side of the fracture where it begins most, and press more strongly than before with your hand without letting go of the pressure you have already put on the fracture site. And then lengthen yourself with bandages from the location of the fracture a little, and slowly loosen the pressure bit by bit until you take hold of the location with your whole hand.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fracture over the location where it is broken with bandages, and then go to the sides that are farther from the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the bandage and the loosening of that according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
And then pause between the bandages with a piece of wool or cloth with which to wrap around the deformity of the fracture if there is any deformity; and if not, do not pause on it for any reason.
And then pause on that other bandage, and then wrap it around these bandages decently made as fast as possible if the location is not inflamed or has a cauterized boil; and later pause on what sits under the boil and removes the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then press on those bandages.
And the splints should be made of split cane bark or wood from a fig tree or branches of date palm; and each splint should be shaped according to this form and figure:
However, the splint that is placed on that fracture should be a bit thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how much the limb is in size and thickness; and then press on the splints with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then tie it above with thread decently as we have said about tightening, and let your tightening be stronger where the fracture is located, and the farther away from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
And the threads should be medium in thickness and subtlety, and made of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some people doing by using strings of rope for tying, it is a great error when they try to achieve equality of tightening.
And very thin threads are not suitable either, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tightening with them, and it is not necessary for there to be less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
And if the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints near the tightening in the rough places, then pause them with a piece of wool or carded lamb's wool between that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture occurs with displacement, and especially in the elbow, and I have mentioned it in that chapter about singularities.
And know that not every broken limb should be immediately immobilized with splints; because when the limb is large, it does not require splints to be applied on it for at least 3 or 4 days, depending on your certainty of the appearance of a boil.
And this is the method used by the ancient plasterers to treat fractures and dislocations and twists:
"A plaster commonly used as a poultice for bone setting, especially suitable for complex fractures and more so for women and children, because it has no heat nor friction. Take powder of meal, which is the flour that remains after the movement of the millstone on its walls."
"And it's good like this, except that you should sift that flour with water, and make the dough not too thick or thin. Then use it accordingly."
"Another way to make plaster for bone setting and dislocation: take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and radish, which is the root of wild radish; mix them all together in equal parts. Then add myrrh and aloe four parts each, aloechil twenty parts. All these are ground and sifted and mixed with water or flour paste if the condition is severe. Use this plaster for it has good composition and restores lightly broken bones."
"Another way to make plaster for bone setting and dislocation: take radish root (margold) and white althea one part each, myrrh and aloe four parts each, acacia six parts, and tragacanth twenty parts."
"And all these are ground in a mortar with water added, then sifted and made into a paste with water or flour paste to be administered."
"A method for plastering joints and separated bones in their places, and to relieve sudden pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: take fresh wool and immerse it in vinegar, oil of cypress, and set it aside over the affected area."
"But with this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, nor does it draw out pus or expel pain properly."
"Another way to make plaster that restores broken bones: take equal parts of fig leaves and poppy leaves; grind them together and make a paste with water."
"A shortened method for plastering to aid in the restoration of bone fractures and to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take white poplar bark, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and make a paste with wine if the limb is not inflamed."
"But if it is inflamed, use that made with water from fresh coriander or with water and a little salt."
"Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolving than the previous one, when a hard abscess occurs during bone restoration: take white poplar bark and its seeds, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them together and make a paste with water from willow or sweet water or wine, depending on the quality of the limb and its color."
"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration, but rather a cerote made of wax and oil, and not for any other cause; and he recommends that it be between thickness and subtlety."
"But it is seen that at Galen they are applied to the broken limb during its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat are like myrrh, incense, and similar things, according to those causes that we have recommended."
"A method of plaster that alleviates injury and pain: take equal parts of ground frankincense, cypress, human hair cut off or chicken feathers, white poplar bark, and salt; grind them together and sift them, then make a paste."
"But the amount you should leave on depends on how much remains stuck and it is appropriate to remove it when: consider if there is no pain or swelling and the bone has not moved from its place, then do not remove it for several days." "And if there occurs great pain or pressure or inflammation in the place, then you should remove it immediately or wait until the hour and remove that plaster from there."
"Then take a cloth and a wet sea sponge, immerse it in warm water, and wash the affected area internally until the pressure subsides and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour. Then apply clean wool immersed in sour wine and oil or rose oil, and leave it on overnight to ensure that there is no cauterization of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has decreased and the pain has disappeared."
"And then reapply that subtle strapping with a thin plaster until it is healed by your first strapping."
"And if at times the abscess and the heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents have already been removed, and you need plaster and strapping, then repeat that equally as you did at the beginning."
"And if no cause occurs in the limb from those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it but rather leave it on for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all of this is left on for twenty days according to what you observe in the dislodging of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches coagulation of the flesh over it."
"And then adjust the strapping more tightly than your first strapping, and adjust it according to the increase in the swelling of the sick limb, as it is remembered."
"But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and emaciated more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore immerse it in warm water every time you remove it; do this for three days total. And loosen the strapping a little, so that through this operation the limb receives nourishment and heals easily."
"But what foolish restorers of the limb fracture do when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation; there is great fear, and if it were done correctly this would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books and taught."
"And I have not seen anyone among them do that, which is why it is more reasonable not to do so."
"Chapter Second: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
The bones are broken into pieces and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct because some fractures occur due to the impact of a blow that breaks all the bone inside the joint cavity, which is located within the bone itself, like what happens with an axe in a tree trunk, and this type of fracture is called axial; or the blow cuts into some parts of the bone and cuts the flesh without penetrating deeper than it. This kind of fracture is called absolute dislocation.
And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and it is either crushing or grinding; and its cause is an impact with heavy force or falling onto rocky ground, both of which resemble each other.
And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the periosteum that covers the bone itself, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be either great or small.
And there is also a fracture that occurs within the bone itself, in the subtlety of fine hair, and this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
And there is also a fracture that occurs either from falling or from an impact of rock and similar things, which causes some lamellae of the bone to enter into the interior parts, and this happens particularly in concave locations, like what happens with earthenware pots when they are struck and their fragments enter into the interior.
And this happens most often in moist bones, as in the skulls of infants.
And all these types of fractures seem to be pieces scattered like stars. And you will find all this information in its proper place (i.e., in the book).
And you can recognize all these types of fractures by their detection on those parts and by investigating them with touches and by the odor of putrefied flesh that is above them.
Capillary fracture can be recognized by this: it appears as a dark line on the bone, and when touched with a probe, it feels smooth.
However, in treating fractures, first consider the circumstances of the illness. If you see signs that indicate, with manifest significance, fear such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting, acute fever, dilation of pupils and redness of eyes, then do not treat it until these conditions have abated.
But if you see unusual signs but the patient is otherwise healthy, then you may begin treating them.
This is because if the injury happened to you in the beginning when it was happening, and this occurred during the days of winter, then you should study the bone's fracture before the fourteenth day according to all its conditions.
And if it occurs during the summer days, then you should expose the bone before the seventh day, ensuring that what is left of the bone has decayed from the surrounding flesh, and that the aforementioned signs have occurred.
And if the fracture has already reached the soft tissue covering the brain and is in many small pieces and rough, then you should insert the wedge-shaped probe according to what I will teach you.
And so you should shave the patient's head and uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as best as possible following the pattern of the injury, so that it is light upon the patient.
And if you detect the bone or fluxes of blood or a hard abscess, then you should pause treatment with what is necessary, and this: you should warm the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure that there is no flux of blood. Then begin the operation around the bone and its ablation.
And this is according to one of two operative methods.
And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow straight probe like this:
"And then administer more of the incision powder than the second one."
"And it is necessary that you have diverse incisions knives of different lengths, some being longer than others; some shorter ones with tips sharper than the others and made of steel or iron."
"And use them with ease in percussion on the incision knives, so that you do not hit the head and hurt him/her."
"And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must first drill around it before administering the incisions with non-depth drills."
"And these are not called such because those do not stop at the end of the bone of the test but approach it so that the drill has a rounded tip or margin above which is left sharp like the edge or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"It is convenient that you take many of these drills with you, each suited to the thickness of each bone, so that you have at your disposal all kinds of drill bits for any skulls you may encounter, with tips sharp and lengths and widths suited to the thickness of each bone."
"And here are three types of drills: One for drilling around a broken bone is to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another location, making sure that there is enough space between all tracks equal to the thickness of the drill."
"And then incise with incisions between each track of the bone, making it as subtle as possible in order to radiate the bone out, or with your hand, or with any other cause through some tools which you will have prepared for that purpose, such as tweezers and subtle forceps."
"And it is necessary that you be very careful to ensure that the incisions do not touch any cause of the brain."
"And then when you have drilled around the bone and it is separated from the brain if it continues with it, you will extract it, being careful to raise and remove it in the roughness of its surface that is on the bone with another tool similar to an incision, but nevertheless being more careful and subtle than other incisions."
"And if there remains any fragment of small bones and you try to remove it with ease using the appropriate tools, then take care to clean it with linen cloths and cotton which we have mentioned."
"And another method of operation is easy and remote from fear, which Gaulisius describes and praises highly; this is the language of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the fracture of the bone from the place where the break is most violent and obvious, until you have uncovered that fracture and placed aside from there the tip of this gentle and happy incision whose shape is as follows:"
"And the lenticular incision is long and does not cut any cause, and the acute incision is of it on both sides beforehand in length, like this: ; that the lenticular incision is adapted to the brain with the face of it incidentally cutting into the bone."
"And then strike with a small hammer on the incision of one partition until you have incised all the bone with ease as it rotates, and you are sure that no panic occurs in it at any moment, even if the patient is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, even if he was asleep."
"Then if any cause annexed to the bone of the panic is broken in certain places of the bone, cut that from it with the tip of this lenticular incision and separate it from it with ease, because it is separated from it without harm and without fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panic, and that which is cut off or left on the bone remains rough and subtle satagias, then it is necessary to raise that roughness with subtle razors for which you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to apply them in every place where they are most convenient and most appropriate according to what your operation of that broken bone requires."
"And it is necessary that you use in your operation with which you shave the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then use little by little the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach to administer the most thin and subtle of all."
"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, it is necessary to proceed according to what you have found for their correction."
"And this is why not everyone who has studied that art agrees on it." "This is what we have shown in relation to large fractures."
"And if the panic is stretched when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press upon the brain, and then apply a linen bandage and do not bind it too tightly but only according to the quantity of the wound alone."
"And leave it with this care for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization; and then untie it and apply medicines that cause excessive dryness, such as linseed poultice and powdered earth and aristologia, and others similar to them."
"And make these medicines into powder that is sprinkled upon the wound, such as are dry; and universally apply to it any medicine that has the property of cleansing without biting."
"And take care according to your ability that the wound in your treatment is clean and not dirty with grease or anything else; and do not allow virulence to accumulate there because when it settles upon the panic of the brain it corrupts it and harms it, and you will bring about great mischief."
"And it happens in the brain of the head when the bone has been cleaned there and especially when care is taken of it that blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider now if any of the accidents that we have mentioned happen to the patient, you should know that they are harmful without doubt."
"And if blackness does not appear except from the medicine that is applied above and this is done by the virtue of that medicine, then it is necessary to take one part honey and three parts rose oil and with these linseed a cloth, and then place it on the brain; and then treat it with the species of treatment that you deem appropriate until it is healed."
"Chapter III."
"On the restoration of the nose when it is crushed."
"You should know that the nose is not broken except by two pieces rising together or one of them twisted, because it has two bones, for the left piece is made of cartilage and does not break but becomes bruised and twisted."
"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into its socket and with the tip of your index finger press inward to reduce the fracture from within while using your thumb from without until the nose returns to its natural shape." "And let this be done by you with ease, but take care not to cause harm upon the patient through your operation."
"And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it cannot be reached, then the extremity of the splint should be made thicker."
"And if the fracture is in two parts, then make a plaster cast accordingly."
"First day after a fracture, if possible, apply cold compress to the wound. If not, then apply hot poultice."
"If the fracture is in one part of the nose, insert a wad of cloth into the nostril. If it's in two parts, use two compresses; ensure that the compress is large enough to fill the nasal passage."
"Some ancient healers say that compresses should be bordered and changed every day, but I have not seen this practice. It is better to enfold the wad in an album of hard-boiled egg mixed with powdered mallow; leave this in place until the bone has healed and the cartilage strengthened."
"Sometimes, instead of using compresses, it is better to insert a strip of lion's cloth into the nose to absorb any accumulated pus. This should only be done if the nasal fracture is severe and there are no breathing difficulties."
"This method may not be necessary for you; feel free to choose whichever method you prefer: inserting a strip or using compresses."
"If another abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diacylonal."
"But if there is no abscess formation, then you should apply a plaster on the outside of the nose using chickpea flour and powdered mallow with albumen of egg. Also, place it over the lion's stop, without pressing the nose for any reason."
"But if the nasal bones are fractured with a small break or comminuted, you should then split them and extract those fragments using instruments suitable for that purpose. Then close the wound and treat it with substances that enhance healing and consolidation, along with appropriate plasters."
"If a denture falls into the nose, you should treat it with compresses and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
"Chapter Four."
"On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated."
"When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not involve the teeth, observe whether the fracture is only on the outside and not divided into two or curved inward at the edges. If so, its reduction should be easy."
"And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and do likewise with the right index finger for fractures on the left side. Then gently press the convexity of the fracture inward using that finger, with your other hand supporting the outer part of the bone."
"If the fracture of the lower jaw is already separated into two parts, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to reduce them."
"If teeth are loosened due to disruption of the bone, then strengthen those that you expect may break with gold or silver wire or thread. Then apply cerote over the broken jaw and place a doubled cloth over it, followed by another cloth well moistened in cold water or a sole leather strip placed along the length of the jaw. Finally secure it properly according to your judgment without damaging it."
"And instruct the patient to rest and remain quiet, and avoid using straws for drinking liquids."
"If you notice that the jaw has already been distorted in any way, then on the third day gently manipulate and reduce it. Then correct any deviation and apply a plaster made of powdered mastic, egg albumen, or chickpea flour after removing the cerote. Finally cover the plaster with a lion's claw bandage."
"Once the plaster is attached and well-adjusted, leave it on without removing it until the fracture has healed and become strong. For many times this fracture becomes firm in three weeks."
"If a fistula appears later on, then apply the remedies mentioned above for its treatment until it heals and is removed."
"If the fracture involves teeth, then determine whether they are separated or displaced. If they are displaced, use appropriate instruments to remove them as you see fit."
"If the opening of the tooth socket is narrow, then widen it with a dental elevator according to your need."
"Then, after removing the displaced teeth, if there is still some bone remaining, widen the socket with a dental chisel. If not, apply a suitable plaster and insert it into the socket until healed."
Chapter Five
"On the reduction of a fractured clavicle."
Many times the fork of the hip joint is broken before the muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
When it is broken, it can be separated or partially separated without displacement of the fragments. The restoration is easy in this case. Or it may occur with displacement of the fragments, which makes restoration difficult. Or it may occur with the fracture being comminuted.
In the case where the fracture is comminuted, the operation should be performed as follows: have two assistants present, one to hold the adjutator and follow the broken fork of the hip joint, and the other to extend the thigh on that side.
Then carefully reduce the fracture with those fingers, ensuring that it is properly aligned according to its natural shape and not prominent or concave at the bony prominence.
If more extension is needed, then use a sandbag or wool pad of suitable size placed under the thigh to achieve the necessary amount of extension. Then elevate the hip joint and press the sandbag with your hand while reducing the fracture as required.
If you are unable to externally rotate the thigh to bring it to the front of the knee, then have the patient lie on their back and place a pillow or bolster under the opposite side's hip joint. This will help to achieve internal rotation of the hip joint.
The assistant should press the thigh at the hip joint while elevating it until the head of the femur is elevated to its normal position. Then you can reduce the fracture and align it with your fingers as described earlier.
But if there are any bone spurs or osteophytes around the hip joint causing resistance to reduction, then you should gently fracture them with a bone cutter and remove them to facilitate easy reduction of the fracture.
If the fracture is retained in the bone, then use one of the chisels you have brought with you to perform an osteotomy. After placing the hip joint in traction using the device designed for this purpose (which can be made of wood or iron and has the following shape), carefully insert the chisel into the bone at the fracture site and gently strike it with a hammer to complete the osteotomy.
"This resembles an ulcer with such being its cavity; let its width be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it."
"Let its length be according to what is possible for you during the operation; it should have two extremities like this, and one extremity is wide while the other is narrow."
"If the breach caused by the wound that you have made while extracting the bone's satire is wide, and you are sure of its cauterization, then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture."
"If the breach is small or you fear cauterization of the wound, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cut."
"If an abscess occurs, then take a cloth dipped in sour wine and rose oil and wine, and apply it on that place."
"And all that, ensure that the knife does not touch the broken bone; and for this reason, check the injury every day so that when you see the limb softened or notice the knife already removed, then you should correct that and tighten the bandage."
"Also apply the sleep of the patient on his collarbone and place him with his arm on the bed's edge at night, so that with that he is elevated on his side, and thus the clavicle fracture is elevated by elevation of the muscle; or his arm is tied to his collarbone."
"And do not leave the limb untied until it has healed properly or an abscess appears within twelve days."
"And also renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the bone already set in that way, and adjust it in the restriction and restore that until it is restored and the clavicle fracture has coalesced."
"And it is strengthened and made comfortable within twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it can be done in less time than that."
Capitol.vi
Chapter VI: On the restoration of shoulder fractures
"A spatula-like fracture is one that occurs on the lateral side of the shoulder and only its margins are fractured, not its shaft."
"And therefore when the fracture occurs on its middle side — and it is only known through touch — then according to the figure of the fracture, force its preparation and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that you can possibly do."
"And also apply powdered barley flour with egg albumen and rose oil; and also apply doubled cloth powders; and also apply on top of it a thin table knife according to the quantity of the entire spatula or more a little."
"But if the knife remains concave in some of the locations of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with rose oil and also apply the knife according to equality."
"And also strengthen it from above with hot humemati with proper restriction and firmness of the knife until it is not removed from its location."
"And check the limb every day. And whenever it is softened, tie it again and tighten it and adjust the knife if it has moved from its location."
"And make the patient lie on his own side."
"And the spatula is restored in twenty days or twenty-five."
"And therefore when this number is completed, then you should untie the limb, and ensure that it is of those bones whose union is not endangered nor their dissolution."
"And if you proceed from the location of the weight-bearing bone and put the elbow down, then incise it there, and open it up, and do according to what we have said in the clavicle fracture regarding the treatment of abscesses if one occurs here."
Capitol.vii.
To repair a broken foot
Sometimes the foot breaks in the middle of it and then the ends are either displaced or fragmented.
When the foot breaks in the middle of it, one of its complications is that it leans towards the sides and causes pain to the patient, difficulty in walking, coughing, shortness of breath and vomiting blood. It can also be felt inside the cavity where the bone has broken.
To repair it, the patient should lie on their back and place a pillow between their thighs. Press gently on the muscles of the foot and adjust the bones using two hands until the bone regains its proper shape. Be careful during the operation and make sure to do everything that is necessary according to your ability and what suits the case best.
Then place gauze or cotton soaked in plaster on the foot and apply a thin layer of softwood or chalk powder, wrapped in cloth. Make sure to wrap it carefully around the broken bone without applying too much pressure. Sometimes, you may need to apply additional bandages on the back for support and secure them with appropriate tension. Keep an eye on the bandage throughout the healing process and tighten it as necessary when it becomes loose.
If the bandage causes discomfort such as itching or pain, if there is inflammation or an abscess at the site, you should remove and replace the bandage immediately. Clean the area and reapply fresh plaster and bandages according to proper wound care techniques. If necessary, adjust the tightness of the bandage gently and reposition it until the wound has healed properly.
Chapter VIII
**Treatment of Broken Ribs**
Bone breakage does not occur except in large spaces that are on the back; and at the extremities of its ends, it rarely happens at that location unless it is cartilaginous. And knowledge of this is not hidden from feeling during its investigation with them.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that it aligns the fracture with them according to the most possible manner, ensuring that it is well aligned as needed, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards its interior ends, then there occurs in the patient intense pain and piercing, like piercing that happens to one who has cried, because the bone pierces the membrane; and there occurs difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting much blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And even the Ancients used this method with many devices.
And they said this: whenever there is retention of food from the sick person who generates inflammation and windiness, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed towards its outer parts.
But we should avoid this because it might cause an abscess if not done carefully; and if one does happen, then it would help with that.
And some of them said that it is necessary to stop the wind and then suck with force; and this seems reasonable, but nonetheless it is feared that the wind might drive the excess towards the place due to weakness.
And some of them said: whenever the place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in warm oil, and powders are inserted between the ribs until it is full, then let the bandage be done evenly according to its roundness; and then treat the illness with pleurisy cure and medicine.
And if the illness causes intense pain that is not tolerable, and the bone pierces the membrane with piercing hurt, then we fear for the patient; therefore we should cut over the place, uncover the broken rib, and immediately put upon it that instrument which preserves the cipher, of which the memory has been precedented, and gently insert the bone, and extract it.
And then we should join together the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs, then take some cotton and dip powder into rose oil and apply it to the place; and treat the illness with whatever is suitable for treating an internal abscess.
And let him be propped up on pillows upon which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX
About the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, which then become stuck together, similarly affecting the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, consider this: if sometimes their muscles are softened and stunned and dead, and they cannot move those limbs nor extend them nor contract them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they do not feel any pain, then you shall know that they will not recover. In such cases it is mortal.
But if those limbs move and they feel sensation when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then you shall know that the bone is saved, and the illness will pass with care.
And if you see similar fractures in the vertebrae of the neck, and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider their weight.
Then if you find that they are already softened, then it is as if what has happened to the muscles has also happened to them. And especially when they lie on their back, they have difficulty breathing and vomiting without wanting to, and sometimes they are suddenly turned onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you shall know that it is mortal, and at that point do not bother with its care.
But if none of these things happen, the case is better and easier to treat.
And the treatment of it is that you should perform cupping on the inflammation or swelling that occurs over the broken vertebra, either with a cautery cup or with mollified wax; place it on that spot several times a day until the inflammation is sedated.
And then apply one of the comforting and resolving plasters, and strengthen it with lint; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if you see that there is separation of the fractured bone or some other cause which is already separated from it, then it is necessary to tie a bandage around the neck and to keep that bone in place; and especially join together the edges of the wound with sutures if they are large; and also treat it with an embrocation of incense until it heals.
But if the lower end of the bone is broken, and this is the end of the spine, then you should insert your little finger into the anus with your left hand, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to its shape; then apply plaster and bandages on it, especially if they are indicated, and also strengthen it.
And if you feel broken pieces in the wound, then extract them and remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that is previously indicated until it heals.
Chapter X
Of the restoration of the ankle joint.
"Bones of the wide hips are broken, and if they break, the fracture is not just a common break but one that extends to both ends and is inclined inward; this causes pain in the area and puncture wounds, making the limb numb when fractured."
"And the treatment for it is that you stretch your hand over that part which lies above the fracture, which is its shape."
"And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you apply that which seems to you equal to the space assembled according to its natural shape."
"But if the fracture is in the long part or one that declines towards the joints of the left side, then you make the sick person lie on their stomach so that you can prepare the treatment for that fracture." "And once you have applied that [splint], pause on it with plaster, and also pause on that staff or club, and bind it tightly without fear of puncture from the fracture or movement of the splint."
"And apply the concavity with what fills that space which took on the binding according to equality, and command the sick person to sleep on their back or on their side."
"But if an ulcer occurs afterwards, then cease the extension and treatment of it until the ulcer is sedated, and apply to it what sedates that according to what has been mentioned before; and also return to the treatment of it, binding it in this way as is customary."
"And if this happens in the bone or they are crushed, then you remove them."
Chapter xi.
On the treatment of a fracture of the jawbone.
The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its treatment is in one of two ways, the first of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness of this shape:
"And there should be tied on both ends two straps, and it should be suspended from an elevated place."
"And let the sick person sit on a seat; and then place their broken arm on the wood so that it reaches to the middle of its end where the curvature of the wood is attached."
"And then suspend some heavy weight on that, or the minister extends it to both sides; and then the physician examines the fracture with his hands together so that the fracture returns as it should."
"And the other way is that the sick person lies on their back and suspends the hand of their neck with a strap; and then commands two ministers, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with both hands; and the other holds its foot from below; and each extends to their own side."
"And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind above the fracture with a strap and another strap over that; and each of the two ministers extends to both sides."
"And then if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the strap on its middle and the other below the fracture toward the bone."
"And similarly if the fracture is near the bone, then it is necessary to place the strap on that location and also on that bone."
"And apply it with ease and without trouble; and then when it is well applied according to what is necessary, then bind it if no cauterization occurs."
"But if a cauterization occurs, then leave the binding for 7 days, and place over it lint soaked in vinegar and rose oil so that the cauterization may heal; and then bind it."
"And the way to bind it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that jawbone, and place its covered hand on its own muscle."
"And then wrap the cloth around it and bind the arm to the jawbone so that the arm is in a straight position, unless some cause prevents it due to the broken bone."
"And then apply splints."
"It is necessary to press upon the fracture that same stone which has been placed there, and press it strongly compared to other stones; place your thumb between each stone, and let the length of the stones be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on either side."
"And press strongly upon the stones with the restriction that was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"Your restriction over the place of the fracture should be tighter." "And when the fracture extends further, the restriction should be lessened."
"So once you have arranged the stones and restriction as we have described in the moment when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you should do so."
"And if you fear inflammation, then on the seventh day you shall remove the restriction and stones as we have said."
"And also consider the bandages in all parts for three days so that there is no pressure or inflammation in the place; and thus correct everything according to what we have said."
"But if you are confident that there is no risk of this happening, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more."
"And let his bed rest be upon his back, and let his hands be upon his stomach."
"And place over the joints a cocena full of lanolin, and observe at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not dislodged nor dissolved, and that the bandage remains moistened; therefore correct this with your skill."
"And feed the sick person according to the order that we have given beforehand, so that at first the food is subtle until he begins to grow stronger; and then you must make the food thicker for him."
"For the custom of the bandage and chamber pot is that they should remain in place for forty days, and then it is necessary to remove them, administer baths, and apply ointments which will correct this."
"And if the fracture has grown together, then do not remove the bandage and stones until after one day or two months."
Chapter XII
"On the restoration of fractures of the arm."
Bones are composed of two bones called forearms; one is small and holds the wrist, the other is large and lies beneath the small forearm bone.
It's easy to break the larger or smaller forearm alone, but it's hard for both to be broken at once.
And when the small forearm bone breaks above, its restoration will be easier and its healing faster.
"When a person's bone breaks, their fracture is bad, and healing is difficult."
"And especially bad when two bones are broken at once."
"So if the bone that is broken is a small one on top, it's necessary for the doctor to intervene and restore it, making a small opening with ease so that it can be reset."
"But if it is a large bone that is broken, then a more extensive opening is necessary."
"And if both bones are broken at once, you must make the incision quite wide and strong."
"And you must place the figure of your hand in such a way that it allows for restoration and extend the opening over a cushion, with the palm of your hand facing upwards, so that all the fingers are aligned, and the little finger is lower than the others, and the patient is lying on their side propped up on a bolster."
"And place a cushion in front of it at its height or opposite to help the patient not slip."
"And then the assistant should extend their arm from below with their hand or a cloth, while another assistant does the same above."
"And then the doctor will reset the bone in such a way that it reduces it as much as possible according to its proper shape."
"But if during the surgery of the bone there are difficulties, then you must push hard with all your strength to reduce it back into its place."
"And if during the surgery you find that the bone has separated and there is no hope for its restoration, then you must cut it open according to the manner we described above."
"But if the fracture is accompanied by plague, I have already spoken about that chapter in particular, so now let us move on to its treatment."
"And if you encounter an abscess at the beginning of your restoration process, then take a cloth mixed with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, and it should be moderate between thickness and fineness. Place this cloth over the abscess with subtle pressure until the abscess yields. Then remove the cerote and apply an emplaster prepared from ground barley flour with egg whites, and afterwards apply plaster; the plaster that is placed on that fracture should be as thin and strong as possible."
"And know that the number of splints for the arm is usually seen in the most common dispositions, or that there is a fracture in one joint or two joints at once."
"And then apply the splint over the location of the fracture with great strength and force, and when it is more towards the upper part of the fracture or towards its lower parts, apply the splint a bit softer according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. The thread with which they are tightened should be moderately between fine and thick, as we have recommended."
"And observe the limb and its bandage for a few days." "And if you encounter any cause that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you must wrap the limb with cold water until the swelling ceases."
"Let the limb rest without being constrained until it has recovered, and then apply the splint again."
"And if the splint has softened and the bone has healed and seems to be in good condition, then correct everything with your skill."
"And if you see that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess tightening of the splint, then you must soften it a bit and leave it for a few days until the nutrition can reach it again, and then tighten it once more."
"But if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs during the illness, then it is not necessary to remove the splint until around twenty days or thereabouts."
"And then hang the arm of the patient with his own strength and agility, and have him sleep on his back."
"And know that this fracture is usually restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, but it can be restored even earlier in twenty-eight days, depending on the disposition of complexions and dispositions of strength."
"Chapter XIII."
"Of the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers."
"Know that the thumb and fingers often fracture, but it rarely happens otherwise."
"And when the hand is fractured or injured, then the patient should follow these instructions: lie down and keep his head higher than his feet, and place his arm extended on that side."
"And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them so that they fit together with good alignment."
"And now it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless a poultice cauterizes; then place a splint above according to the quantity of the area, which you have already wrapped in linen."
"If the bandage is on the inner part of the thigh, you should make it resemble a sling of cloth and order the patient to hold it with their hand; then it should be wrapped in a long piece of cloth."
"And place the splint made of leather on the cloth on which it can be elevated, so that the flesh is close to the palm; then tighten it as necessary."
"But if the fracture is on the outer part of the thigh, then you must place splints above and others from the lower edge of the thigh to the palm, so that the leg is straight and upright; then tighten the bandage as it is wound around like a wheel between those edges."
"And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of these parts, then if it is the big toe, elevate it as necessary and tie it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in one of those other joints, such as the middle joint or the one next to it, or the ring finger or the little finger, then elevate it and bind it with its corresponding finger; or all may be bound together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said for the big toe."
"And consider, in your treatment and application, the position of cauterization and opposition — with your operation — according to what is necessary when there occurs any cause for those, as it has been described above."
"Chapter XIV."
"On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip."
"The bone of the hip is often fractured, and it becomes apparent through the sensation that the part before and above becomes displaced."
"And its treatment is done in such a way that the limb is tightened above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on his stomach and face down."
"And also, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone, extend all the limb to its part according to its quality."
"But if it is displaced towards the edge of the hip, then extend the limb towards the back at the part of the buttocks, so that the extension occurs there, and another limb below the fracture."
"And similarly, if the fracture is displaced towards the back, then extend the limb towards the back, with extension at the parts below."
"And also, the doctor should bind the bone with both hands inwardly until it reduces according to its natural appearance and the bone joins together by good union. Then a plaster and bandage should be applied if there is no inflammation of the limb." "But if inflammation occurs in it, then leave it for several days until the inflamed swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment."
"The bandaging of it should be done as follows: wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap the thigh so that it reaches the ankle and hip."
"And insert a long linen bandage between the hip and thigh near its lower parts, bringing the ends of the linen up from below both sides, then wrap what is excess of the bandage around the thigh and hip."
"And also apply a splint over the hip at the location of that fracture, and apply another splint on top of the thigh bone."
"And also fill the spaces between the thigh and hip with soft dressings so that the bandage is held together firmly."
"And also begin with a strong binding of the middle part over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings. And as you gradually extend the limb from that location, your binding should be less and lighter and softer."
"And also extend both ends of the linen bandage below until it reaches the heel of the foot, and then tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the limb is not moved from its position."
"And also leave the bandage on it until there is no inflammation, swelling or redness, nor any other signs of that nature; and if anything occurs from those causes, then remove it and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible according to what has been said many times."
"But if the bone has died from the bone being broken, then you should bind that part as tightly as possible. And if it is not possible to do so, then cut over it and remove what is dead until it is healed with whatever follows this treatment."
"And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened with splints outside those which have already been adjusted to it, as we have said in the case of the thigh and arm."
"But nevertheless in the restoration of it in this manner, limping does not occur. And if it is restored alone without the other thigh being applied to it, then it is necessary that it limp constantly."
"And know that the hip is strengthened in forty days or a few more or fewer according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
"Chapter XV."
"On the restoration of fractures of the knee cap."
"Know that fracture of the patella is rare, but often happens at its base."
"But if fracture occurs there, it is nothing but a crack or break in its parts, and this is with pain or without pain. And about all of this has been stated by sensation."
"And its restoration is as follows: whatever is broken of its parts should be bound with the said bandages until it adheres and joins together according to what is possible by approximation, ease, and formation."
"And also apply plaster and apply a round splint if necessary, and strengthen it above with bandages as is convenient."
"And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended for other fractures, such as inflammation and redness and similar things so that it opposes all accidents with whatever is convenient until it is healed."
"Chapter XVI."
"On the restoration of fractures of the thigh."
"Know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the thighbone; and the other is slender and is called the shinbone."
"And it happens with some species of fracture that one occurs in both bones of the thigh just as they occur in the two bones of the arm. And for this reason its restoration is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm by binding, and its operation is one."
"And if both bones are broken at once, the thigh becomes disabled in all its parts."
"And if only the slender bone is broken, the thigh becomes disabled anteriorly."
"And if only the thick bone is broken, it causes lameness on that side due to those causes which are not due to binding."
"And also apply extension and approximation and splinting according to that bandaging."
"But however, it is necessary that if the fracture of the thigh is large and has many attempts to reduce it, then extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue."
"And in the thigh there is some cause for operation over the arm, and this is when you bind the splints and complete all your operation. Then you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed on those sides which are placed in usual positions and made similarly from palm branches; lighten them of those which have small thickness, and let there be no thick ones, and let their length be according to the length of the thigh, and from the front towards the back."
Wrapped around each bone in two layers according to its length, place one at the base of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be as low down as possible on the foot.
Proceed to tie the two straps in three places on both extremities and at the middle point, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from bending at the right and left joints, which is good for posture.
Now apply a wooden splint according to the length of the leg, and place it on the leg in such a way that it maintains its immobility.
Especially make sure you do this in cases of fracture, when the bone is properly aligned.
Additionally, examine the leg every day and study it carefully to ensure that you guard against inflammation, swelling, or other similar causes. Whenever such a cause occurs, pause treatment until it has healed properly.
Capítol XVII
Chapter XVII:
"Breakage of the heel does not occur often; however, fractures to some bones in the foot do occur occasionally; and those of the toes rarely experience fracture, but they can suffer attrition during periods of disposition."
"And if the bones in the foot are fractured and some of these bones become elevated above each other, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
"And they pause one foot upon that which is elevated by those bones, and they press it down upon them, crushing and grinding them until they are shattered into pieces."
"And they apply plaster and bandages above, and place a small table under the sole of the foot with two wooden plugs on it."
"And they stretch that limb with the foot downwards because you have bound that limb with wrappings and other things which cause swelling."
"And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage because you will find the bones crushed, either ground or dislocated; and the operation on them is as follows:"
"But if some are broken, then you should restore them and grind them together just like glue, and remember to do so in the restoration of those of the hand." "And you should pause the broken bone on its length according to the length of the finger, and then add some wood to it on one side; and place your foot on that table which I have recommended to you, stretching the limb downwards."
"But if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you should pause upon each finger separately according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin cloth, and stretch the table downwards under your foot, standing on one of the table's corners near the sole of your foot so that it has good retention."
"And remember to note that you should not forget all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents which we have said; and pause on each accident according to what is necessary."
"Chapter XVIII."
"On the fracture of the hip bone of a woman, of the pubic bone, and of the penis bone of a man."
"When the hip bone of a woman is broken, then make her lie on this bed, bent at the buttocks slightly backwards, and hold it there."
"And the midwife should press the hip bone inward and it should be made like this: and then the woman should be shaken up and gradually raise her hips so that everything is forgotten until the hip bone comes out like this and the broken bone returns."
"And then apply powder on the bone; and when she wants to urinate, gently move the hip bone and let her urinate, and reduce it again according to the manner in which you had previously moved it, and return it to its original position with the first bandage."
"And do this for seven days or about those days, because that is restored."
"And if you wish to do so, take a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the bone, then insert the entire bladder into the hip bone; and blow air through the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the bone, because the fracture returns."
"And then press it inward with cotton and let it rest for some days according to what we have recommended until it is healed."
"And when the pubic bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and splinting what we have recommended for the hip bone."
"And what is correct is not concealed in these nearby fractures which little effort requires, especially to that one who has some knowledge and understands this my book; because that fracture indicates to you the greatest dispositions towards a right-handed restoration and bandaging of it."
"But in the case of a broken penis bone, take a guarguamela (a type of large bowl) of hot water and place the penis inside it; then apply a wrapping of cloth around it, let it rest for three days or about that time, and it will heal."
"Chapter XIX."
"On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are out of place."
"It is convenient for someone who suffers a fracture out of place, especially if the bone is large like that of the thighbone or forearm, or similar ones which you consider and perform flebotomy on immediately if the conditions for it testify as we have said above."
"And if the out-of-place displacement flows freely, then it is necessary for you to hold it back in this way: powderize it over the bone that is broken, unless another cause is present."
"And then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay if there is no occurrence of an abscess."
If an abscess forms, then leave the treatment of it until the ninth day, during which time the abscess should have softened, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days in total, for you will cause harmful accidents.
If the bone breaks and sticks out above the open wound, then you must carefully reduce it with your hands and push it back in gently using minimal force.
If reduction with your hands and without instruments is not sufficient, then reduce it using this instrument: an iron one, seven or eight digits long according to the size of the bone fragment. It is necessary for the physician to have three or four such instruments on hand at all times for use in various types of fractures.
And if it is reduced, then apply a small amount of pressure so that it does not bend out again during the operation.
If the bone is of sharp pointed shape with marrow flowing out from its ends, and if it appears thicker at the top than at its base, then it should be split open.
And this is how you do it:
"It is named in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', which is a few shovels."
"Why does it need to be paused with the end of the hook elevated over the edge of the bone prominence?"
"And place him in such a way that he returns to his original position and is secured with some equipment."
"And then you should fix the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not grip well with the instrument, then you must insert the end of that bone into the instrument so that it has power over it."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been mentioned, then cut it with one of the saws that have been discussed, or use any other means available to you."
"And then remove the rough edges and small sharp points from the remaining bone."
"And when the bone is reduced and the patient experiences intense pain upon reduction, you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place. Therefore, do this in order to relieve the patient's great suffering."
"When you have completed the setting of the bone, then apply a dressing made from black stypic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not allow any grease or oil to come into contact with it, lest it cause gangrene and corruption afterwards."
"And then apply splints at the time of completion of the setting of the bone, and leave the dressing uncovered until you insert it with bandages and use wrappings according to the amount of dressing."
"And be very careful that you do not stretch the dressing over the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and it has caused death or gangrene or some other severe illness in their patients." "And if your bandage is loose, soft, or different from the usual bandage used for fractures."
"And if the dressing is large or of poor quality, and you fear that one of those accidents we have mentioned might occur, or if there is pain at the site, then do not wait for those splints, but rather use a wrapping of tough cloth instead of splints and stretch it with those."
"And when, after one or two days, the dressing begins to form a crust, then remove from it the cloth that you had placed there with wine, and then apply poultices, as is customary with us for treating dressings, such as treacle and similar things."
"And it is fitting for you to remove the bandage and examine the dressing every morning and evening until it has consolidated and healed. And make sure that the member is positioned in such a way that the gangrene can flow easily from it towards its extremities."
"If the dressing remains for many days and does not consolidate nor become separated from the crust, then you should know that this is due to some fault in your treatment, and therefore you must examine the dressing carefully." "And of those faults that are separated and removed, remove them and extract them. But if some cannot be removed because they adhere to the limb and cause pain, then persevere until you can remove them."
"If you notice that the dressing is fetid or foul-smelling, then this is an indication of corruption or putrefaction, and therefore you should follow one of those remedies which are appropriate for its treatment, as is described in its chapter on the cure."
"And in this case, it is better for me to speak and for you to listen: When the bone is crushed, elevate the limb above the bed like the thighbone or the armbone, and similar ones of large limbs. And do not attempt extraction, nor allow anyone else to do so, because many times death has occurred because of this; rather leave it alone until it putsrefies by itself for about twenty or thirty days. Then treat the dressing if you see fit, but if not then leave it."
"Chapter 20."
"Of the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture."
"Swelling often occurs near the site of a fracture during its healing process, especially if it is near joints. This swelling causes the limb to appear deformed and prevents its normal movement."
"Then consider if the swelling is recent and apply to it medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, resin, myrrh, and similar things. Take some or all of these and mix them with stiptic wine, egg albumen, or vinegar, then place them on the swelling wrapped in linen and bind them securely."
"And leave the dressing in place for several days without removing it. Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Or use a lead plate descended upon it, because lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs."
"But if the swelling has already become hard and rigid and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut it along its upper border and excise the excess flesh or scrap it away with forceps until it is removed. Then treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter 21."
"Of the restoration of fractures when they have been restored, but the limb remains thin and weak, not following its natural course."
"When a fracture of the bone has healed, but the limb remains thin and weak, this is not due to any single cause. The causes are many: either too much solution of the bandage and ligature, which was not applied correctly; or excess scarring of the tissues preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or too much rubbing on the part of the patient; or too much movement at an inappropriate time; or lack of blood in the body due to weakness."
"The treatment for this is to feed the patient well and strengthen their heart so that blood increases in them. Apply baths, and use rubbing with warmth and joy."
"And also apply plaster to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment to it. Or continue rubbing it with warm water until the nourishment returns to its natural course."
"Chapter 22."
"Concerning the treatment of broken bones that have healed crookedly, and forbidding their operation from this point forward."
"When a limb that has already healed becomes crooked and prominent due to a break or fracture, causing the limb to appear deformed although it is not forbidden from its natural operation, you should not listen to those who claim that the limb was recently broken."
"But there are already many foolish doctors and healers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly despised and brings great shame upon those who perform it."
"But if the limpness and swelling are recent, it is necessary to wrap them with warm water in which these herbs have been cooked: namely, marsh mallows and rosehips, and melilot, and others of like kind. And let a plaster be made with mollifying plaster such as dalliation well made; or let there be taken mucilage of marsh mallow root and let it be kneaded with grease of goose or oil of camomile, and let it be plastered therewith; or let fat figs be taken and cut with pigeon dung, and like those medicines that are called ammers consolidating."
"And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent gentle friction with the most humid hands, and movement of the member should be administered at all parts in all hours."
"But if the crookedness is already advanced and has become hard and converted into bone, and necessity for cure with iron is required, then it is necessary that it be cut as little above as possible, and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what is superfluous of swelling of that member with the bone be incised with subtle scissors, and ease in that be administered with diligence and care."
"Chapter XXIV."
"Of speech concerning dislocation."
"Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of the body whereby movement is hindered, and the figure of the member is altered, causing great pain and injury."
"So when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly reduce that which has been displaced and not delay its reduction for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard with what has been done, making the reduction of dislocation difficult."
"And therefore it is necessary that it not be moved nor stretched at the time of inflammation for often times it causes spasm and severe pain."
"But when this happens, it is necessary that you have recourse to the phlebotomy of the illness and let blood at that time so that inflammation may restrain itself. And then let the member be embrocated with hot water and oil, and let it be reduced gently."
"And every joint should be treated with what first comes to mind concerning it."
"And now I have arranged the chapters on dislocation following those that were previously mentioned regarding fracture, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowest."
"Chapter XXV."
"Of cure for dislocation of the lower jaw."
"So when both mandibles are dislocated but not broken; and dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places by slight movement and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva collects, preventing him from opening his mouth nor closing it, with his tongue wrapped around his words."
"But when dislocation is slight, in most cases it returns to its place by itself without cause."
"But if dislocation is complete and entire, then reduction must be administered gently and not delayed in any way."
"And it is the duty of the attendant to hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert his finger into the depression of the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both his thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers outside holding the cheeks steady. And he commands the patient to close his jaws and draw them back from either side; and the physician engages the lower jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place."
"And if reduction is difficult, and especially so if both jaws are dislocated together, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered until the reduction of both becomes easy and not delayed in any way, as we have said."
"And when they return and are engaged, with the mouth closed and not softened, then let him lay upon those powders of cloth with cerot and make of wax and rose oil. And let it be bound gently with soft bandages."
"And let the patient sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to either side; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason. Until pain has subsided and jaws are healed, then let him eat what he wishes."
"And this should be done gently, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and spitting until the jaw is healed."
"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then often times fever and frequent thirst occur, with great pain in the abdomen and vomiting of pure bile."
"And when you see this happen, then know that it is destruction. And many times the person to whom this happens dies in nine days."
"Chapter XXV."
"Of reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle."
"The collarbone is not dislocated from its place by the break of bone. And sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which is evident to the touch."
"And its reduction is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms." "And press the place with your palm with strong pressure, for it will return."
"And then bind that with plasters and powders and strengthen it."
"But the extremity of that which seizes the windpipe and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day. Therefore, it must be reduced and engaged according to what we have said and according to your ability."
"And then bind that with plasters, powders, and bandages. And command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed."
"And with this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place."
"Chapter XXVI."
"Of reduction of dislocation of the muscle."
"Know that the muscle is dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated at the part of the chest on the left side."
"The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle itself, which is rarely done. And it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder blade or at the parts in front by the nerves."
"Especially is it dislocated and protruded on the left side beyond the chest, especially in those who have little flesh, it is easily dislocated. But in those who have much flesh, it is protruded with difficulty."
"And sometimes it happens to some men that by a blow or fall, the muscle becomes swollen with swelling and is dislocated thereby."
"Then it is necessary that you prepare what is needed for the operation on them, and then proceed to operate on them."
"And it is known that the dislocation occurs when you are at the fingertips; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because there is a clear difference between them. You will find concavity in the head of the muscle and then you must touch the head of the muscle like this [gesture], and the patient cannot raise their hand to their ear or move it at all."
"If it is dislocated, you must press below or above it, and then you will find a clear touch, which cannot be hidden."
"And from this dislocation, an easy reduction can be made when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
"And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand above their head; and then places his thumbs on both sides of the fingertips of the hand, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then releases it when it returns gently."
"But if it does not return as we have said, and since the beginning when the dislocation occurred, many days have passed, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and administered a plaster that softens and moisturizes like this: if it were coarsely ground aloe, linseed, and mallows in water, and it is applied."
"And then the patient is made to sit up on their heels and placed with their hands behind their back, waiting for some sort of bandage between elevation and compression, and then the doctor places his heel on the sphere and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand down so that it does not move from its place, and another minister holds the patient's head so that it does not move from its place, because the muscle will soon return to its proper location."
"And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the opposite side, and insert his muscle between the fingertips of the patient and lift the fingertips upwards while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards from their belly." "But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that something else be suspended along with him, to weigh him down because the dislocation will soon return."
"And it is reduced in the same way according to another manner: and that is, place on the ground a long pole whose head is round like a pestle, not too thick nor too thin, and then place the patient upon it; then place lion's skin over the top of the pole, and the patient stands along its length, and extends their hand on the other side; and stretches their body on the other side with force because the joint returns to its proper location quickly."
"And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a pole whose length is two braccia and whose width is four digits, and let its thickness be reduced at the fingertips in this way:"
"And then place lion's skin over the round head of the pole so that it does not slip away from the patient."
"And then place the fingertips of the patient upon it, and extend their hand or arm along the pole until it reaches its limit, and bind the pole with bandages over the elbow, forearm, and end of the hand."
"And then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and extend the hand to its limit, and suspend the other body on the other side because the joint enters quickly."
"And when the entrance of it is completed according to whatever manner you are able to use, then place a wool bandage of equal quantity over the fingertips; and then place a plaster prepared from powdered chalk with saffron and albumen of egg over all the muscle, so that it revolves upwards; and then bind the fingertips tightly with compression; and let the bandage be wrapped around the plaster, and let the patient's hand be attached to their neck, and let them be left thus for seven days without moving their hand."
"And the patient's food should be limited so that the member is strengthened because it is easier for it to be healed when it is lighter."
"And then let the patient's food be increased gradually over seven or nine days and let them exercise their movement. And if it becomes firm and does not become softened again, then it is healed."
"But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then let cautery be administered to it with three tracks, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
"And if even this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and compression are reduced over it several times and still it does not become firm and strong and cannot raise that arm upwards, then know that the nerves of it which are at the head of the muscle are either cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be placed in its proper location."
"Regarding the dislocation of that which is done at the elbow and wrist or the backhand, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its place."
"And let the other compression be applied to it, and let that member be cured until it is healed."
"And if heaviness occurs in the member and slowness in its movement after healing, then let the patient use baths many times until that heaviness is alleviated and until it returns to its former nature."
"Chapter 27."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
"Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated in all positions, especially more so in front-to-back positions, and the dislocation of it is not hidden to you when it is centered before or behind according to whatever figure may be dislocated. And when you reduce the dislocated hip into its socket, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch with that its muscle."
"And when you reduce it [the dislocation], do so before the cautery aposteme comes, for if it comes to the cautery aposteme, reduction is difficult and much harm cannot be avoided; especially in back-to-back positions, for such is worse than all other types of dislocation and causes greater pain, often leading to death."
"And the restoration of it [the hip], when it is that which can be reduced, is as follows: let his hand be extended with two hands and his arm expanded; let the physician's hands be upon the joint and outside it; and let him push the joint into place with the ulnar edges of his hands together, or with the side of his palm turned inwards until it returns to its proper place."
"But if the dislocation is in front-to-back positions, then let it return thus by bending the hand upon his hand until it strikes the joint with the side of his palm."
"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and much force."
"And let two assistants extend his arm, and let them hold him firmly in that position so that he is not moved during the extension."
"And moreover, let the arm be turned around on all sides, for it is wrapped up in a doubled cloth or bandage over his hand."
"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that these causes may help in the lubricity of the joint with facility. And then forcefully push the joint back into place until it returns."
"And furthermore, the reduction of it [the dislocation] must be supported upon that compress in which there is astringency and excitation with alum water, and let it be extended with descending suspension, and his arm suspended from his neck; and let him lie quietly for some days."
"And furthermore, let it be relaxed. And then if the joint is formed in its proper place, then remove the bandage from him and leave him."
"And if the joint seems weak, then repeat the compress and bandage, and leave him for some days until it is strengthened. And then remove that."
"But if it happens that there is swelling about the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then administer moistening baths and gentle friction, compresses until it is alleviated; or let him lie upon the joint elevated on pillows; so that it may be a greasy motion. And then let it be bandaged, and leave it there day and night." "And then remove that [the bandage], and put him in a warm bath. And when he is warmed up, then rub the joint with gentle friction, and then let him lie upon it elevated for three times consecutively." "during which time he is to remain until it is healed."
"And if you wish, place him upon that hollow of cow's hide which has been moistened and scraped with the edge and stretched over it. And do this several times, for that is moist and reduces its swelling."
**Chapter XXVIII.**
**Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder-blade, which is the joint that is between the arm and the hand.**
The hand has sometimes been dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to act quickly in reducing it when it happens, before the place becomes inflamed or an inflammation occurs.
The reduction of the dislocation consists in placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and having the attendant extend the patient's hand. The doctor then places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its normal position.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm is already facing the stomach of the hand. In this case, during extension and reduction, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table instead; if the dislocation occurred beforehand on the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be placed internally on the table so that the doctor's hand can better cover the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, then that's good. But if not, then continue pressing the hand until swelling subsides and leave him be; don't insist too much because after some days he won't suffer anymore nor will you be able to do anything about reducing the dislocation.
But if the joint remains dislocated despite your efforts, then do not tell the patient any cause for this, but simply say that his hand is relaxed and he cannot feel anything. You should know however that the nerves are pinched or cut, so don't try to reduce it further unless you cauterize around its mouth and explain why this needs to be done.
Therefore if the reduction is successful, then keep the patient's hand pressed with the splint we've recommended for about 4 days. Then remove it and let the hand rest; afterwards, exercise the hand gradually to regain its mobility.
But if there's still some stiffness in the movement of the hand and it occurs occasionally, then apply cold water compresses with gentle friction a few times until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX
On the treatment of dislocation of these (the joints).
Sometimes, these joints are completely dislocated.
And when one of these fingers is dislocated on the back or palm side, then press the finger and push the dislocation back into place using your thumbs until it returns.
And afterward, hold the top of the finger, suspend that end on the side where it was dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
And then suspend it again and extend it until it is completely aligned in its proper place by that same day.
"And when night comes, tie that according to the above narration, and do not cease untying it during the day and exercising with motion, and tie it at night; do this for several days until it is tight."
"And do likewise if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and tie it at that joint and make this your first operation until it is healed."
"And similarly do this when other joints are dislocated."
Chapter 30
"On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
"When some of the vertebrae of the back or neck suffer complete dislocation, and some of those vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure for that, because death soon overtakes the patient."
"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of the patient's bowels occurs unwillingly and without control; many times some members are softened on one side or the other, or both arms or legs, or one of those, or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times the movement of those is made in four directions."
"Therefore that is already dislocated towards the back parts and is called gibbosity (kyphosis)."
"But the treatment of it is that immediately you should consider whether the gibbosity occurred in infancy, because then there is neither cure nor hope of recovery for that."
"But as to those cases which occur from falling or from percussion or similar ones, the Ancients have already described the methods of treatment at length in many ways, and that is what I will abbreviate here because of my closeness to the intention of this work, with which I have briefly dealt using various instruments, by means of which I will show those things and explain them."
"And among those, only those that occur properly on the back can be cured with what I have recounted here."
"And it is that the patient should lie on their face with their chest close to a wall, and they should be extended downwards from there using soft instruments so that the chest does not get hurt."
"And prop a straight staff should be placed upright on the ground at the end of the chest near the patient's head, and another staff should be placed under their feet at the other end of the bed."
"And the assistant should hold one staff firmly so that it does not move from its place; and another assistant should hold the other one according to this form."
"And wrap a cloth over the patient's head and tie it firmly; and extend one end of the bandage to the staff which is above the patient's head, and fasten it there; and similarly extend the other bandage over the patient's hips downwards on both sides, and fasten it below their buttocks; and adjust all the bandages and fasten them to the other staff which is above their feet."
"And then each assistant should extend the bandage to its respective staff, but do not move the two staffs and their bandages from their places, although they are not fastened as we have said."
"And the doctor should place his palms on the patient's shoulder blades with strength and press down firmly so that they return to their natural position, or he may use a table for this purpose and adjust himself onto the table with his feet."
"But if it does not return with this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia and hollow out its edge on the side that we have said is near the patient so that one end of the table can fit into it." "And then place the middle of the table on the patient's shoulder blades, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and press down strongly until the shoulder blades are brought together and return to their proper position."
"And if you wish, turn the one that is twisted with your hand; and it is that you should lie on the ground in front of the patient's head near the end of the chest between two staffs whose length is a braccio each, and similarly at the foot of the bed there are two other staffs whose length between them is a palm, and already made in each staff is a hole through which the cord passes, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move."
"And there should also be one round staff on which is the cord, and it should be inserted into both holes of the two staffs."
"And at one end there is a hole in which the staff is fitted, whose length is a palm and which has been twisted; and similarly the other two staffs have holes like this."
"And then tighten the bandages that you have stretched over the patient's chest with the cord which is above their head, and those that you have stretched over their thighs with the cord that is below their feet."
"And then place an assistant at each cord to twist it with his hand, and the doctor should press down on the shoulder blades as we have said."
"Now that the spine has returned and the area is covered, it is necessary to place an absorbent cloth moistened with egg albumen on the affected part, and then apply gauze; next, place a board of such width or approximately equal to three fingers' breadth, and length equivalent to the quantity that takes up the area of the swelling, on top of the spine, at its division."
"And then let it be wrapped with linen bandages as we have said, and use soft food until it is healed."
"And if there is any remaining inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that soften and cleanse should be applied using the method of the table for an extended period, which we have recommended; and a lead plate has already been applied to that location."
"And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the spine in the back due to this dislocation, and this bone is already weakened by it; therefore, no pressure should be applied to it with this medication, for strong pressure could cause death."
Chapter XXI
"On the treatment of a dislocated hip."
"You should know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not undergo dislocation except in cases of displacement, whereas other joints with slight movement and concavity do occur."
"The joint of the thigh is displaced in four ways: it can be displaced inward or outward, forward or backward."
"And it is most commonly displaced inwardly, and less so anteriorly or posteriorly."
"And the sign of an inward displacement of the thigh is that when you bring together the healthy leg with the affected one, it appears elongated and its buttock seems more prominent than usual; the patient cannot flex their hip joint due to pain, which indicates a collection of fluid and blood in the space where it has entered."
"The sign of an outward displacement is that its symptoms are opposite to those of this condition."
"And the sign of an anterior displacement is that when you extend your leg, it appears complete, but still cannot bend without pain in the thigh region. If you try to walk forward, you cannot do so without limping on the affected side; urine retention and blood stasis are also present, with the patient walking on tiptoe."
"And the sign of a posterior displacement is that the buttock cannot be extended, nor can it flex the hip joint without pain in the thigh region. The affected leg appears shorter than the other, with relaxation of the thigh muscles and swelling in the area."
"However, the treatment of these displacements is as follows: if the displacement is old and chronic, you should wait for a suitable opportunity, such as when the patient has fallen asleep or is distracted, to apply gentle traction and reduce it according to its position. However, this alone will not suffice; additional procedures may be necessary."
"However, if the displacement is recent and belongs to one of the four types mentioned earlier, you should attempt to reduce it by first flexing the hip joint and then extending it both anteriorly and posteriorly. Then move the limb to the right and left repeatedly until it returns to its proper position; no further treatment is necessary."
"However, if it does not return to its proper position in this manner, you should then apply traction force by extending the affected leg from the hip joint or using slings or a bandage tied around the thigh above the knee. Another assistant should extend their hand over the patient's hip in such a way that they place their fingers on either side of the trochanteric region; and another assistant should press firmly with a bandage placed on the affected area while holding onto its extremity."
"And this traction should be continued until the hip joint extends to the level of the great trochanter or the posterior surface of the femur reaches the acetabulum."
"And this traction should be performed in a single attempt while the patient is lying on their back on the ground, with their buttocks hanging over the edge of the bed."
"This method of traction is applicable to all four types of hip displacement."
"Therefore, if the displacement returns using the method described above, that is good. However, if it does not return, then specific treatment for each type of hip dislocation is necessary."
"In reducing this type of hip dislocation, the patient should be placed in a supine position on their unaffected side. Then apply gentle pressure with bandages over the affected area between the head of the femur and the trochanteric region; finally, extend the leg from the hip joint to the level of the great trochanter."
"And another assistant should firmly grasp the leg and press the greater trochanter inwards while forcefully extending it externally until it returns to its proper position."
"This type of hip dislocation is easier to treat than the others, as it is more readily reduced using this method."
"However, if the limb does not readily reduce using this method, then it is necessary to flex both hips and knees with strong traction applied simultaneously to both thighs and calves."
"And the length of traction on each limb should be approximately four fingerbreadths, with the affected leg being extended two fingerbreadths more than the unaffected one."
"And then suspend the patient by their hips over the head of the bed so that they are in a supine position with both knees extended. The length from the ground to the sole of the foot should be approximately two cubits."
"And then command a strong youth to push the head of the femur upwards while another youth supports the patient. The youth pushing the femur should do so with great force and speed, causing the hip joint to return to its proper position."
"However, in reducing this type of hip dislocation (dislocation of the femur from the acetabulum), the patient should lie prone as recommended earlier. Then apply firm pressure with a bandage over the affected thigh and foot."
"And then two poles should be placed on either side of the patient's leg, one at the foot and one at the hip. A third pole should be placed in the middle and covered with wet cloths to prevent discomfort when the leg is extended externally."
"And then each assistant should extend their side of the leg, while the physician guides the reduction according to the art."
"However, if the dislocation is anterior (at the front of the acetabulum), then the limb should be extended gently and this is done by placing the patient on their back as described earlier. The physician should place the palm of their right hand over the affected thigh and use their left hand to shorten it by pressing on the femur while extending it externally at the knee joint."
"If the dislocation is posterior (at the back of the acetabulum), then it is not necessary to extend the limb externally. Instead, elevate it above the ground and place it on a hard surface such as a table or bench, with the patient lying face down and the limbs extended according to what has been described previously."
"And pressure should be applied using a board over the location where the joint is dislocated."
"So once the reduction is complete, as indicated by the fact that you can extend both thighs simultaneously without causing pain or discomfort to the patient, then you should apply two splints and immobilize the limb with bandages for three or four days."
"And then remove the bandages and splints after three or four days and compare the lengths of both legs to ensure that they are equal."
"Then if you feel no discomfort when moving your leg, you will know that the dislocation has healed and you may then allow the patient to walk."
"But if you feel any weakness or instability when moving your leg, then return and apply splints again for three days to ensure stability."
"And after removing the splint, allow the patient to gradually increase their walking distance over several days until they are comfortable and fully recovered."
Capital XXXII
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and backward; however, it does not dislocate forward.
The sign of shoulder dislocation is when the patient applies their leg to the affected area, then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the reduction of all three ways is to make the patient lie on their right side so that they can extend their leg if possible; attach your left hand to the front of the shoulder and place your foot between the patient's feet; then firmly grasp the shoulder with both palms, press it back into its original position using your strength, while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the shoulder returns to its normal location.
The sign of successful reduction of the shoulder is that the leg adheres to the affected area without labor or difficulty.
And then splint that in place and secure the leg to the affected area. Then bind it tightly with a bandage for three or four days, then remove the bandage.
And do not allow the patient to move around for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
But if reduction of the shoulder by you is unsuccessful, then proceed with strong extension using traction as described in the previous section on the treatment of hip dislocation.
Chapter XXXIII
Of the treatment of ankle dislocation.
The ankle sometimes gets dislocated by minor injuries and sometimes by major ones. It can be dislocated either medially or laterally.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that the area around the affected joint becomes swollen and inflamed.
"The cure for its removal is easy recovery. It should be stretched out gently with the hands and wrapped up until it returns."
"However, in the treatment of its dislocation according to the full procedure, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their right side, and hold them firmly with a strong and able servant standing behind them in the middle of their back."
"Then place your right hand above the shoulder and your left hand below it near the elbow."
"Then pull the arm towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, stretch it out with your left hand; and press gently on the bone of the elbow upwards without forcing."
"And do this twice as we have said."
"Then press the bone of the elbow upwards again on the third occasion; you are at the elbow joint."
"If this manner is repeated once or twice more, and if the foot swells, that is good. Otherwise, repeat the operation, for that returns."
"If reduction is prohibited with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground. Place a stone under them that prevents them from slipping out of your grasp."
"And the minister holds the patient's parts. Another minister extends the leg with their hands or with a cloth placed on the knee of the leg. And each minister extends against the extension of his part, and the stone remains between the patient's thighs retaining them so that the body does not lean towards its sides during the extension."
"And the doctor reduces the dislocation with his hands. Another minister holds the healthy part at its sides, for the reduction returns easily."
"And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction is good, then apply an plaster and bind the leg strongly with bandages. And tie the foot with bandages at the bed."
"And be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel bone, for the bandage should not be too tight and not press strongly upon them."
"And leave him thus for two days or three. And if the bandage becomes softened, remove it."
"And on the third day or fourth day untie him, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days." "But if it is necessary for him to go before that period, there is danger that the dislocation will be dissolved and corrupted during his movement, and thus he may not receive proper care."
"And if an abscess occurs as a result of the burn, then you should administer in the incision of it what was mentioned earlier in our narrative about another place for cure and embrocation until it is healed."
"Chapter XXXIV."
"About the treatment of dislocation of the said toes."
"It is necessary that he who has dislocated his toe be reduced with a small extension without force. And what is not difficult can easily be accomplished."
"But if the dislocation is in certain bones of the foot, then place the patient's foot on a level with the ground or on a table while he is standing as if walking."
"And you stand on your feet and place the patient's foot on what protrudes from the joints. And press it down with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position, and make sure that it is reduced and does not appear in the protruding area."
"And then place the sole of the foot on a table that covers the whole foot. And press it down with a firm bandage for three days. Then untie him and allow him to rest from walking for more days until he is healed."
"Chapter XXXV."
"Of joint dislocations that occur with sprain or fracture or otherwise."
"When such an accident occurs and you attempt to treat it and restore it, many times death ensues."
"But it is not necessary for one to presume about its treatment, but rather that who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses remedies at the beginning that only cauterize sores, leaving the patient to divine judgment, not expecting health from destruction, but relief from illness, and where there appears some hope." "And then make haste to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before an ulcerous sore forms."
"And then if the limb returns as desired, administer regimen which prevents ulceration and cures the sprain with what is suitable for it of drying remedies."
"And if dislocation occurs with a fracture and the ends of the bone are separated, then you perform the setting of them, doing in this what we have said previously in the simple cases concerning that which is prior in such places."
"And guard and avoid according to your ability those things within the paths of fear that have been preceded by my teaching; for this is better for you to owe to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in your time." "Thus end the words of Albucasis perfectly, from which God may be blessed." "Amen."
