"O, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of medical science, to achieve its completion and purpose, it seems to me that I should fulfill my promise to you with this treatise on surgery."
Because the art of surgery is greatly neglected in our region and time, and its science has greatly declined, leaving only a few traces behind. And unless it were for some brief descriptions found in the books of the Ancients, which are now muddled and unclear due to changes over time, leading to errors and misconceptions, so that their true meanings are obscured and their strength diminished.
"And it seems to me that I should revive this art with a well-ordered treatise following the path of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation; also including figures of cautery instruments and other tools used in surgery, both for addition to the explanation and preparation thereof, which is necessary."
"But the reason why there are few skilled surgeons in our time is because the art of medicine is lengthy, and its practitioner must first be well-exercised in the science of anatomy, which contains knowledge of the joints of members and their shapes, connections, and separations; also knowing the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number, size, and location of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they discharge."
"And therefore Hippocrates said that 'in words little, but in deeds much, especially in surgery.'"
"But we have already said this at the beginning of this book: whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error, causing many deaths among men, as I have seen too often. For some are formed in this science but lack its knowledge and experience."
"For I once saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who incised an escrofulous abscess in the neck of a woman, cutting some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed, causing the woman to suddenly die."
"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from the bladder of a man who had fallen into that state, and the stone was large. He came upon it and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder wall, causing that man to die on the third day."
"And I had already foreseen that this would happen, and when I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die."
"And I saw another doctor who was paid by our Duke to practice surgery. He attended a blacksmith who had fractured his hip joint; due to the doctor's ignorance, he reduced the fracture with pillows and bandages of great tension, not allowing room for respiration."
"And he kept him bound up according to his desires, and then released him, and allowed him to rest for several days, commanding that the bandages be loosened. And so it happened that the hip joint became inflamed, and the thigh flesh putrefied, resulting in ruin."
"And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandages. And thus there was tranquility and alleviation of his pain."
"But nonetheless, corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that I could not prevent it. The corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient perished."
"And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess. It was soon ulcerated, and the evil of it greatly magnified in its lord."
"This is because the cancerous caul is pure of melancholic humor. Therefore, it should not be cauterized with iron in its entirety, but only where necessary on the member that suffers from it."
"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is danger in the greatest situations."
"And I have already mentioned this throughout the entire book wherever operation is spoken of where there is danger and fear. Therefore, it is necessary for you to keep watch over this and leave that alone, so that foolish people may not find an opportunity to speak against you."
"And therefore take up your weapons with sincerity and protection of God, and deal with illnesses with gentleness and firmness."
"And use the best way by the grace of God to bring about health and praise-worthy success. Leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and put aside your weapons at that which makes you fearful, so that you may remain steadfast in your faith and in your name: for more remains to your glory, both now and in the future, than in your sanctity."
"Wherefore, as I have said in some of my writings:" "Do not treat illnesses badly, lest you be called bad doctors."
"And I have already divided this book into three parts."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter ordered in this manner: regarding the weights of tools and their shapes, and concerning the instruments for burning, and that which is necessary in operation."
"Here begins the second part of the division:" "The second chapter: concerning incision and perforation, and of cupping glasses, compresses, and the extraction of arrows and similar things. This chapter is ordered regarding the shapes of instruments."
"The third chapter: concerning reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torticollis and similar conditions. This chapter is ordered regarding weights and the shapes of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to speak of the qualities of the cauteries used in that operation and their contraindications, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited."
"Therefore I say that the discussion of the qualities of cautery and its contraindications is lengthy and drawn-out, subtle in knowledge and secretive. Many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves regarding this matter. It suffices for me to discuss a little of their sermons, fearing lengthiness."
"And therefore I say that cautery benefits universally every condition regarding matter or lacking matter, except for two conditions which are devoid of matter:"
"In the case of a dry and hot complexion that is disorderly; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, but others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness which is caused by heat and dryness, as fire's nature is heat and dryness, and it would be inappropriate for such an illness to be treated with something that is hot and dry."
"The one who says the opposite of this argues that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in men's bodies. For when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find that the body of man is cold."
"And I say, based on what that person has said, that I have experienced this many times in practice."
"However, it is not necessary to add anything more about this subject that has already been thoroughly discussed in the chapter on cautery through repeated exercises. For having understood the diversity of men's complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their members, as well as their causes, accidents, and duration, is sufficient."
"But in other complexions, there is no fear for you, and especially in hot and humid illnesses. For all doctors agree on these matters, and they are not divided regarding the benefit of cautery in those illnesses."
"And know, my children, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness is spoken about in the chapter on cautery with medicine that burns. For fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member that is cauterized and does not harm any other adjacent member unless it causes some slight injury."
"But the action of burning medicine reaches those who have taken it in their members. Often it causes illness that is difficult to cure and often it harms."
"But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but remove excesses. And this is already known to us through experience and long study in this art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from prolonging this discussion. However, if it were not hidden in my book in this passage about the secret of cautery with fire, and its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated philosophically, it would sharpen your minds."
"And know, my children, that they disagree about the time when cautery should be performed and they consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cautery. And especially if cautery is performed for pains or necessary surgeries, such as those that cannot wait due to fear of greater harm, which is worse than a small injury entering through time."
"And do not think that, children, this is only estimated by the vulgar people and foolish doctors. For they consider that in those illnesses which are cured by cautery, there is no recovery of time, and they leave it at that consequence."
"And the reason is not as they imagine it to be for this: that cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause of pains."
"But nevertheless, cautery is preferable to medicine because of its volatility, virtue, and power of operation, and the greatness of its Lord."
"And it is possible that the illness returns at some time, according to the complexion of the sick person, the location of the illness, and the virtue of cautery, as well as what has been prepared in the body from the accumulation of excesses there, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes. But if cautery is administered for an subtle illness in a member with few excesses and humors, such as toothache or similar ones, it is possible that the pain does not return, but this happens rarely."
"And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is truer than they understand it to be. For they believe that nothing is cured by medicine or any other cause except cautery."
"And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine only applies when other methods of treatment have been tried for certain illnesses and they have not worked. And then, at the end of the illness, cautery is administered, which is beneficial in this case." "And from now on, know that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention understood by the vulgar and most foolish doctors."
"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the location of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true. For I have seen and proven that this is not always the case, except in some bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. But when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you because its ignition depends on the quantity of gold you desire according to its purity, and because it prepares itself to receive heat; if you apply ignition precisely on top of it, the gold will melt in the fire, and sometimes some plates fall into the fire due to the carelessness of the artisan."
"And for that reason, cautery should be performed with iron more lightly and more moderately according to the rectitude of its operation."
"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters and those of the head inside the weights, so that later you can ask me whatever you want about it."
Chapter one
"This cauterization addresses humidity and coldness, which are the accidental causes of such diseases as sodden flux, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears flowing abundantly; also excessive sleeping, toothache, and throat pain, generally all illnesses caused by coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones in those diseases."
"The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you should command the sick person to evacuate the head with laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the virtue of the illness, the age and habit of the patient."
"And then command him to shave his head with a razor and also have him sit on a bench covered with wool or feathers, placing his feet on the ground."
"Then place the palm of your hand over the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows." "But first, when your middle finger reaches that spot, mark it with ink and then light the olive-oil cautery lamp, whose form is as follows:"
"And then place that on the marked spot in such a way that it descends gradually with your hand pressed down slightly while you rotate it."
"And then raise your hand lightly and observe the spot; if you see some of the bone already exposed on the head, about the size of a grain of barley, then lift your hand up again and replace it with another one until you see what I have told you to."
"Then take a pinch of salt and dissolve it on the site, leaving it there for three days."
"And then pause over the wound on the edge and leave it there until the skin of the fire is destroyed." "And then treat the area with a quadruple antibiotic ointment until healed."
"And as they said, when the plague is fully opened, the better it casts out the brace, because it is better and more beneficial."
"And some of them said that the spine should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held there until any portion of the spinal cord is adhered."
"And then scrape off what adheres to the bone, and then it should be treated."
"And others said that with the cautery they should reach the end, so that it presses on the bone with great force until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati minor:" "And they estimate from that place the fumes of the head expire."
"And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then treated until it is consolidated."
"But I do not see these two kinds of cautery in any whole person due to fear; and that, it seems to me, is better with health when they are; for the head is devitalized by the solution of continuity from such a wound as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head is naturally prone to disease."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that method and with that procedure there is health."
"Chapter II"
Of the Cautery of the Head
"When in the whole head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is in prolonged disease, and they use plasters and poultices and fomentations and emplasters and ointments and cataplasms and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which did not profit from any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is naturally strong in its creation; and if it is not weak or frail at all, then cauterize with another cautery a little lower than that one." "And then cauterize there over the horn of his head with a cautery until the cord is severed." "Cut the cord and uncover the bone the amount we have mentioned and cauterize there with a cautery at the last part of the head in the place which is called 'vess', — that is the place where cupping glasses are placed." "And be gentle in this, and do not uncover the bone, for by this method there is much less pain than with all other cauteries of the head."
"And I say this cautery in its place, for it is necessary that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occupit be more subtle than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form."
"Chapter III"
"Of cauterization for non-ancient migraine."
"When, despite endeavoring to relieve the head of its sudden pain or if it is spread throughout the whole body, it has been evacuated with medicines for clearing the head and other appropriate treatment has been administered as indicated in the methods for illnesses; and yet no improvement occurs, then cauterization may be employed in one of two ways: either cauterization using an acutely burning medicine or by means of iron."
"To cauterize with a burning medicine, you should take some salt and pour it onto the affected area while scraping off both ends of it." "And appropriately, you should cut into the location of the pain in the temple with a sterile lance until blood flows from that precise spot, so that it may be concealed."
"And then strengthen it with pressure by applying constriction, leaving it there for the space of three hours. Then remove it and wipe off the salt, allowing the wound to dry for two or three days. Finally, apply a bandage over the submerged area until the location becomes better."
"And then treat it with an ointment so that it may heal."
"And if you wish to do this using some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
"Now, cauterization with iron according to this method is performed using a cautery that has this shape:"
"And it is called the 'closed nail' cautery, because its head is shaped like a nail with some curvature and a small prominence in the middle."
"And then place it on the location of the pain, hold your hand steady so that the heat of the cautery does not burn you, and slowly rotate the hot iron with moderate speed."
"And if the amount cauterized becomes equal to half of it due to the specificity of the blood vessels, then lift your hand away so that the artery is not cauterized any further, preventing bleeding."
"And then moisten the area with salt water and apply it to the location, leaving it there for three days. Then apply a poultice with a bandage, and treat it with an ointment until it heals."
"If you wish to cauterize the tip of the scalpel according to cautery, be careful not to cut an artery in this particular migraine that is not ancient."
Chapter Four
On cauterizing an ancient migraine.
When treating a migraine using the methods we have described for the previous cure and those listed in our divisions of illnesses, but finding that these treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the scalpel cautery until it becomes red hot. Apply it to the location of the pain with a line of about half its length, or use the tip; then pause for a moment and strengthen the heat until you can hear the artery hiss and perceive the bone beneath.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the continuity of the mandible, which is moved by mastication; not to burn the nerve or the muscles that move it; and not to cause spasms.
"And if it is about the safeguard and caution regarding bleeding from the artery that is opened, because there is fear during its opening, especially for those who are inexperienced, uninformed, and not skilled. Leave the operation until the beginning."
"And I will bring to mind the regulation of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner, in its proper place in this book."
"And if you see that this illness does not improve with this cautery and you see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it heals."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on ligature of an artery with cautery using two scalpels; this is a better and more certain cauterization."
Chapter Five
On cauterizing earaches.
When there is pain in the ear accompanied by fever and it has been treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then heat the cautery called "puncta," which has this form:
Then apply the puncta to the ignition and move it around the entire ear like a wheel, or around each tympanic membrane if the pain is in one of them. Slowly move the cautery along the edge of the ear opening little by little, until you sense the location with its tip.
"And if you apply this cautery with ten punctures to the entire ear, and then treat those locations until they are healed."
Chapter Six
Burning of the throat.
The tumor that is treated and cured by cautery is not anything other than the species that come from a vein, as we have said in the division of diseases.
Avoid cautery of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve
When you treat that throat condition with herbs and capperwort and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not confirm, then you should cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first on the edge of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery according to what is opposite the affected part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy
And the manner of cautery is that you cauterize it with a cautery on the right at the tip of the ear lobe above a little on the horn of the head, and another one on the temple, its length being according to the length of the finger joint, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the amount of the mass of the tumor is consumed.
And this is the manner of cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is flat. But yet more subtle than this one sees is that one which you have here; and it is necessary to cut away in place of superfluous roughness.
And then treat the place with water that is before processed until it is healed
Chapter VII
Of cautery for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with the water we have mentioned and your treatment does not help and there is no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all of its horns of the head; and a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and a cautery in the throat. And the manner of cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above
And then cauterize it over the mouth of the stomach; and do this last; and then treat it with water that you have processed.
Chapter VIII
Of cautery for oblivation caused by a rash
It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of white hellebore.
"Next, shave the head of the patient and place on the cushion of the poultice described in the treatise on poultices."
"And pause from time to time, for this is the manner of cautery." "And do that according to the methodical order which I have already mentioned."
"If it is not healing well like that, then make three cauteries on the last section of his head, which should be decreasing from the most sovereign part of the head towards the neck." "And pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then carefully cure the cautery with what has been prepared."
"But if you see that the patient is tolerating it well, then make the cautery in the middle of the location; and if you want greater effectiveness, then cauterize those on both ears."
"Carefully cure that until it is healed; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given above."
Capítol nou.
Chapter Nine: Cautery for Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body
"And when you proceed with the softening of the head using herbs and what has been said; and carefully shave the head of the patient, and then make a cautery in the middle of the head, and cauteries on all the horns of the head, and cauterize the last section of it, and make three cauteries on the cervical vertebrae."
"And if it is necessary to soften the body in a paralysis where the patients tolerate it and the condition is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery where the muscle of the nape of the neck is fought against, and raise the patient's hand." "And carefully cure it until it is healed, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery."
Capítol deu.
Chapter Ten: Cautery for Epilepsy
"No cautery is made on the epileptic unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm."
"And then you should soften the brain at the beginning of it using herbs and the other treatments which have been mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of medications."
"And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer purgatives and mastigators that soften the brain beforehand for many days with proper diet."
"And then carefully shave the head of the patient, and make a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery in the occiput of it, and cauterize each horn of the head." "And if the patient is severe and tolerates it, then cauterize that with the cauteries which have been mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body on the cervical vertebrae and the dorsal vertebrae."
"And let it be an olive-shaped cautery according to what has been stated before."
"But if the patient is a child, then pause and make a subtle cautery in this manner:"
Capítol undecim.
"Regarding cautery of melancholy."
"When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize with those cauteries that we have mentioned previously."
"And if the cause of melancholy is declining surplus leading to it, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink water that cleanses the brain following what has been mentioned in the division."
"And then shave the patient's head, and properly make a wreath of laurel leaves for him to wear on his forehead, and then place it in the middle of his head."
"And let the patient lie on his left side, and let him be held tightly on all parts."
"And then apply a liniment; and afterwards it is fitting to rub with wool grease." "And warm that on the fire for temperate heating according to measure, which he shall suffer when it is more in him." "And then place that in the middle of his head within the crown, and leave it there until it grows cold."
"And do this with the patient once every week until his illness is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him making small punctures according to the extent of the illness, but holding your hand thus ordered with a cautery: this is called 'equal' cautery which moistens the brain evenly."
"And then apply that cataplasm wrapped in wool or in flaxseed."
"Chapter Twelve."
"Of cauterization of descending water in the groin."
"When you have determined the beginning of water descent in the groin by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that cleanses his head, and guard him from all humidity."
"And keep him warm in bed for several days."
"And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water from both groins, or on one side only if it is the beginning of descent on one side."
"Cauterize with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are near the shoulder blade; and let the cauteries be in this length at the latitude of the temples."
"And guard against fluxes of blood when he is being cauterized; and if you see any flux of blood, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal."
"And I will come with skill to extract arteries and cut them off and to care for fluxes of blood."
"Sometimes it is cauterized on the neck near the two bones with two cauteries running downwards."
"Chapter Thirteen."
"Of cauterization for old tears."
"When tears from the eyes are old and abundant, and it is verified that this is due to superfluous phlegmatic humors in the veins and arteries which are at the manifest location of the head outside, then cauterize him with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on the beginning of descending water in the groins, and also with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the neck near the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck near the two bones." "And if you need to add something more, then cauterize him on both sides of the cheekbone above the eyebrow with small cauteries."
"Chapter Fourteen."
"Of cauterization for foul breath from the nose."
"When you treat him with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions of cooked barley for three nights; and then shave his head and cauterize it with a medium cautery and an olive cautery." "And also cauterize him with a small cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows near the hair, a little below them."
"Be careful not to burn the artery."
"And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavelh':"
"Chapter Fifteen."
"Concerning the cauterization for the softening of eyelids of eyes."
"When an eyelid becomes softened by illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:"
"And if you wish to cauterize above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on each side, they should be elongated from the temples." "And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
"Press not too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to how much of the third division of the eyelid is burned."
Chapter Sixteen
"Concerning cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into parts within and piercing the eye."
"When the hairs of the eye are converted into parts within so that they pierce the eye, cauterize in those places either with fire or with medicated cautery."
"If cauterizing with fire, command the patient beforehand that he pluck his hairs like those which they usually pluck, until they are lengthened and hardened; and if it pierces there, then you should stretch the eyelids of it with a bandage so that no harm comes to them until the hairs have grown."
"And when they have grown long and hardened, then pause the head of the patient in the usual position, and approximate a tent over the eyelid of the eye with fire, shaped like the leaf of a spear, and let the beginning of it be close to the hairs."
"And then pause with cotton dipped in alum or in mucus of pigeon over the eye."
"And then light the cautery which is of this shape."
"And then cauterize little by little along the figure which is outlined, with small glances, until the surface of the chain which is like the leaf of myrtle is burned."
"And the sign of the good work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised from the puncture of the eye."
"And then elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then pause cotton on the border until the scar is healed." "And then dress that with ointment until it is healed."
"But if the hairs return for some cause after their growth and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform the cautery again over that just as you had done originally."
"But if the hairs remain on the eyelid, then cauterize them until they are lifted up to their natural place and hardened, so that they do not pierce the eye."
"But when cauterizing with medicinal fire, this is what you command the patient: pluck the hairs until they are lengthened and hardened; then make from cloth paper the shape of a myrtle leaf."
"And then take three ounces of known soap and three ounces of quicklime, mix those causes well, make haste so that it does not cool down; then spread this on the cloth which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one eye or both eyes. Then place cotton dipped in alum over the eye, and hold the patient's head in position."
"And then pause your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire."
"And then when the patient perceives that bite, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger; then when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. And then consider if perhaps the eyelid is lifted up like when washed by the constriction with fire or incision; for then it is well done. But if not, return to that of the medicine on the place where it has not adhered, do not denigrate until the operation is hardened and the eye is contracted."
"And then pause cotton on the border until the chain of adhesion is eradicated; then dress that with ointment of definicon or with another one until it is healed."
"And it is necessary that you, due to your operation, guard with vigilant diligence that no dust of the medicine falls into the eye; and if the eyelid becomes softened during some days and for some cause hairs pierce the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at the beginning; then surround it until it is healed."
"And this is the form of myrtle leaf."
"And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness; and therefore your constriction is made accordingly."
"And do not hide the way of rectitude from those who study this art."
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of a fistula that is in the lachrymal duct of the eye.
"When treating a fistula as mentioned in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize it in this manner: tell the patient to hold their head steady with their hands, and have one of your assistants press their head gently but firmly between their hands."
"And also apply a poultice made of hot water or mustard plasters on the affected area."
"And next, prepare the cauterization instrument, which is shaped like this:"
"This [cautery] should be hollow, like a pipe or the quill of an eagle, with one end through which cauterization is performed."
"And if desired, let it be penetrating into the other end as well." If you wish it to come out as it was inserted.
But that which is concave is better for this task.
"And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the fluid and dry that area." "And if it's not open, make an incision there and extract the pus from it."
"And then press the cautery, which should be well ignited, onto that area, but be careful not to touch the patient's skin too much near the nostrils so as not to cause error or discomfort for them. Then place the cautery on the grey hairs of the beard and burn them."
"And if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that's good. And if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary. Then leave that area alone for three days, and afterwards press on it with a border and around it with a drying ointment until it is healed."
"But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a corrosive medication to it until the bone is exposed and it is scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter."
"And here is another method of cauterizing a fistula that some first said: enter into the location of the fistula and make an incision there with a subtle needle whose shape is like this. Then place in that fissure the amount of one inch of melted lead; then place your hand on it with good retention, so that no harm comes to the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the skin of that area; and cover the area of the patient's skin around it wrapped in white album or water, because lead hardens the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing."
"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that's good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of cautery for the split of the thighs."
Many times it happens that there are splits in the labia, and more often in the labia of children.
And when you treat those splits with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then use a small cautery knife according to this form:
And its concavity should be like the thinness of a needle.
Approach gently with that knife and place it in those splits so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerottum until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
"Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth."
When an apostema occurs on the uvula or palate or around the teeth and it bursts open, becomes inflamed, forms a fistula, and you treat it but your treatment does not improve, then you must heat cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then place that heated iron into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it. Repeat this once or twice, and then treat it with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
And if the bone becomes separated and healed, that's good. But if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and remove the decayed bone according to what comes next in its chapter.
Chapter XX
"Of cautery for teeth and softening of gum boils."
When gums are swollen with moisture and teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but they don't help, then place the head of the sick person on your lap, heat the cautery which will have this shape:
"And then raise your hand, and then apply the cautery several times according to what you wish."
"And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it in for an hour, then spit it out, because the bad tooth is hardened and the inflamed gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried."
Chapter XXI
Of cautery of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness or there's ice or worm inside it, or if the cure does not succeed with medicine, then cauterize that one in two ways: either with a red-hot iron from the fire or with a hot coal.
To cauterize with a red-hot iron: Take an iron and heat it in the fire, then quickly grasp its end with tongs and touch it to the aching tooth until it becomes hot.
And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, first immerse wool or cotton in the aforementioned hot coal, then place it on the aching tooth and hold the red-hot iron close to it until it reaches the cavity of the tooth.
But be careful when using fire for cautery, so that the coal or iron is not too hot and does not burn the mouth of the patient.
Then shape the coal or iron as desired, place it on the tooth and hold your hand close until it becomes cool. Repeat this several times until the pain ceases, either that same day or the next day.
And it's necessary for the patient to hold their mouth open on that side after this cautery, keeping it closed tightly for an hour, and then spit out the saliva. This is how the cautery should be performed.
You may perform the cautery with whichever method you prefer, depending on what you find easiest to do.
And this is how the cautery should be performed:
Chapter Twenty-two
On the cautery of hernias.
When hernias are caused by mucus and humors that are not easily digested despite medication, then cauterize them using this method: Take two tubes made of horn or metal, attach them to the cautery, and place it over the swelling. Then place the ignited cautery on the lump once, twice if necessary, until it reaches the center of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days. Then remove it and press a cloth soaked in warm water onto the affected area until what was burned by the fire is removed.
And then treat that wound with ointments, bandages, and dressings until it heals.
**Chapter 23.**
**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids and the Binding of the Anus.**
"When moistures gather on the lung's channel, especially when it's cold, initially treat with laxative medicines and then cauterize the right side of the throat at the depressed area."
"Be sure not to burn the gullet or harm the trachea with the cautery, but just a little."
"Cauterize it also with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last cervical vertebra." "And the cautery should be made with a small one, according to the previous method."
"Then treat it as described until healed."
"Chapter 24."
"On cauterizing a lung disease and cough."
"When a cough and lung disease are caused by dampness and the illness has no fever or spitting, cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the places of the neck, shoulders, and elbows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be applied according to the preceding manner."
"And if you wish, your cautery should be punctured with the cautery called a 'punctum,' the form of which is described in the punctuation of earache."
"And if it's punctured, dress it with water and apply the remedy that is mentioned beforehand to heal it."
"And since cauteries have three branches, caution is necessary when cauterizing. With one cautery you can perform three applications according to this manner:"
Chapter xxv
"Of the cauterization of the titillation, which is the head of the testicle."
"When the head of the testicle is displaced due to lubricous dampness and does not return at its usual time, you must reduce the displacement so that it returns to its usual position. And quickly with a gentle movement, if it has deviated as we have testified, first reduce the displacement by placing the malady on its own side or on its back; then elevate the cord which is in the partition inside the scrotum upwards onto the above-mentioned parts using your left hand, if the juncture is displaced downward."
"And then heat the cautery that has two heads; this is its shape:"
"Then cauterize the cord so that it enters one within the other side; and here is the figure of cauterization at this time using four cauteries."
"And sometimes it's adjusted according to this manner, and therefore there are eight cauteries."
"And then pause upon the cautery for two hours with salt, and make sure that the malady adheres to tranquility, so that the member is not moved by any means until it is consoled."
"And if the displacement is upwards and it does not return, then cauterize on the muscle using a claw-shaped cautery or pointed cauteries because the juncture is confirmed and the dampness is broken and the malady is healed."
Chapter xxvi
"Regarding cautery of the stomach."
"When there is a burning sensation and excessive moisture in the stomach that exceeds its usual condition, causing discomfort, it's time to perform cauterization. Make sure the patient is lying on their back, with their arms and legs extended. Then proceed with three cautery applications: one on the chest area equal to the width of a finger, one triangular cautery below each side of the first cautery; ensure that they are not too close together to prevent scarring."
"Make the depth of the cautery equal to two-thirds of the thickness of a goose feather."
"And let the shape of the cautery be like this: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:"
"And let the stomach be punctured according to that which is feared from this cautery: and you shall make dots on the stomach with a tent, however many you wish, and then cauterize at those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that has been previously mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On cauterizing a fatty liver."
"When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness or moisture or excessive windiness causing it to deviate from its normal state and overflow excessively, and if the disease is not cured by what has been said above, then let the disease be brought back onto its place on top of the liver, and mark three cauteries according to this form and quantity with a tent over the liver near the hypochondria, where the right side of man lies."
"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the middle finger."
"Do not press too hard with the cautery."
"And if the amount of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the maturity of the species of the goose feather, and it is not adjusted; and if the disease persists on the ribs, and if it does not persist, then let him lie down, he who has already spread out his things, and raise his arms."
"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a small cautery, if you have skill and prudence in the art."
"But be careful that you do not proceed too quickly with the cautery, and let the species of the goose feather be absorbed throughout its entire length so that the whole body may be affected and come into the vessels, for here the goose feather is subtle; and know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"On perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
"When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the disease will be heavy and painful but not sharp."
"And if it is in the membrane of the liver, there will be acute pain with a great intensity that sometimes even tires out the physicians who are treating it."
"Therefore let the disease be turned towards its neck; and properly mark the location of the abscess with a tent; and properly ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rope, the form of which has been previously mentioned on another page." "And cauterize with that cautery until the entire goose feather is consumed, until it reaches the cyst, until in ashes it becomes healthy."
"Then properly treat him by the usual methods for treating other abscesses until he is healed."
"But let not this form of cautery be used except by one who has prolonged his studies in the art of medicine and has known many diseases; although some may have been burned through experimentation on this operation, yet let us leave that to those who are wiser than we are, for it is better so."
"Chapter XXIX."
"On cauterization of the plague."
"The ancients used to cauterize the marks of smallpox in this manner: and it is thus that you should take from the roots of the black helebore a root that is found long and dry, and let it be as thick as a finger."
"And then immerse that in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries diagonally placed, one somewhat inclined towards the right side of the beard, and with two cauteries diagonally placed between the fifth rib and the nipple, inclined somewhat backwards; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach; and with three cauteries on the backside; and with one cautery between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest."
"But let not your hand be burned by the cautery, but rather hold it at the end of the goose feather in use."
"And the ancients said that those are the customs of men who use a cautery of iron shaped like this and ignite it, and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess and burns out healthily, just as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver."
"But in this perforation with a cautery there is no danger, for whoever dies immediately has it happen in the location of the fistula which does not heal."
"Chapter XXX."
"Regarding cauterization of the navel."
"When you treat the navel disease with what we have said about treatment in division and your treatment does not conform to it, then cauterize it in three ways or four according to the length of the navel according to the figure of liver cauteries, whose shape has been previously mentioned."
"And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or somewhat more, and the manner of cautery should be as we have described for liver cauteries."
"And do not press your hand onto the cautery; and the disease shall come out above its two sides."
"And there is another manner of cauterization, namely: you heat the cautery with two vents [lit. windings], which causes we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the navel towards the side where the disease is located."
"And let your elevation be such that you lift the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the breadth of the body."
"And then quickly insert the two vents [lit. windings], glowing hot, into that entrance wherewith you entered the navel from the other side."
"And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made."
If you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three points.
Moreover, cure the cautery promptly since it has been lying idle for too many days, because its use is more urgent than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter XXXXI
Of cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteries are not used in hydrocele but in incision properly.
When you treat a hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
Moreover, let the cautery burn deeply enough that it heals slowly over time.
And do not remove the disease by cautery abruptly with water that it causes the two testicles to adhere together, and thus hinder their natural function.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be in the form of a club, as it was described above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as it was previously described.
Chapter XXXII
Of Cautery for Fevers and Hemorrhoids.
"When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, you should cauterize them on the back of the foot near where the ear and little toe meet, lift your hand with the cautery but do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not return that (the cautery) entirely, as brine will remain."
"The cauterization should be done in this way: Next, apply two cauteries to both sides of the buttocks and make a cautery on each side with the tip of the knife-like cautery." "Make the cauterization along the length of the buttock: one below the hipbone and the other below the middle point of the buttock, applying two cauteries on each side."
"And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that any remaining water may dry up."
"And then treat it with those causes that we have mentioned."
"Chapter XXXIII."
Burning of the belly's body.
When the belly's body is for rubbing and humidity within that weakens the virtues, so it is virtue digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated thus with these methods of treatment without conferring, and sometimes the illness suffers cauterization to exhibit itself; therefore cauterize that with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has been said previously in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the navel subtly, with a clavich cautery subtly; and cauterize over the spleen above the liver, or with two cauteries.
And if the humidities are abundant and the illness thus tolerates it, therefore cauterize that one over the navel and over the intestines, and strongly applying two cauteries on the stomach near the groins, for this is a perfect treatment of great benefit from which you will not err.
Capítulo xxxiv
**Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.**
When the body's final menstruation occurs with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as mentioned earlier in this section without success, then cauterize with three cauteries on the left side of the lower back near the triangle formed by the two hip bones, and another cautery above the navel.
If you find that the stomach is chilled and undigested food remains in it, and the face appears pale, then cauterize the area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; apply another cautery to the liver, and yet another cautery to the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving it there for some time until healing occurs. Then carefully treat the interior once it is healed.
Chapter XXXV
Regarding cautery treatment after the incision of hemorrhoids.
"When you cut arteries, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray." "Then insert that ignited cautery into the artery you have cut and push it in until the heat reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows."
"And do this once or twice, because if there are too many arteries, then cauterize each one separately according to what we have recounted. And then take care of them with this until they are healed."
"And when you cauterize with a large cautery over certain areas, it is more efficient in healing."
"Chapter XXXVI."
"On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the skin."
"But if nature does not follow the procedure we have recommended for its location, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal it with cautery."
"Therefore, when there is some fistula that occurs naturally and becomes old, corrupted by dryness and corrupt moisture, then it is more fitting to treat it with a thin probe, and thus know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe."
"And then heat the cautery that resembles a needle." "And then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, and according to the depth indicated by the probe."
"Iron the cautery over that area until those corrupted bodies are consumed once or twice or thrice, according to your necessity."
"And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you believe it is not penetrating."
"Then cure the place that has been healed."
"And if the area is sealed and all materials have been cut away from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it has healed completely."
"And if the materials are not removed from there, then know that it is penetrating or in the early stage of corruption, or this is due to those causes which will be mentioned later."
"Chapter XXXVII."
"On cautery for eruptions."
When redness and pain occur due to heat or thick winds, and the patient's heart is disheartened, then it is necessary to cauterize there with a pointed cautery on each red spot.
And leave the second one a little behind so that three straight cauteries are obtained, and then insert more afterwards for completion.
Chapter XXXVI
On Cauterizing the Bladder.
When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to heat and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize there two fingers' breadth above the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the opening of the bladder; and cauterize there with one cautery at the lowest part of the back, or with two if necessary.
And let the cautery be pointed as is customary.
Chapter XXXIX
On Cauterizing the Womb
When heat and moisture occur in the womb, causing sterility and corruption of menstrual flow, delay in its onset, and pain during menstruation, then it is necessary to cauterize there with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding bladder cautery; and cauterize also on the lowest part of the back with one pointed cautery or two if necessary.
Chapter XL
"Regarding cautery of dislocation of the ankle."
When moist secretions flow from the opening of the ankle, and it is difficult to determine the cause of their discharge or signal of its presence, then one foot is longer than the other when compared side by side. The location of the dislocation is found in the outer side of the foot.
Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the opening of their ankle with a circular cautery device, because once you have marked around the opening as it is rotated, the opening will fall in the middle of the circle.
And let that cautery be of the same form used in cauterizing the stomach.
But if this cautery is not available to you at present, then cauterize it with three olive-sized cauteries.
And let the cautery be applied according to the quantity of the inflammation along the entire joint; and afterwards carefully dress it until healed.
"Chapter Forty-one."
"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
"When pain arises in the hip joint due to friction and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said earlier. Therefore, it is necessary that you remove thick humors from the patient using scented pills or pills made artificially or resembling them; and then cauterize it."
"The method of cautery in this case is done in two ways: either by cauterizing with burning medications or by cautering with fire."
"According to two methods known for this procedure, one of which involves cauterizing the hip joint with three triangular cauteries arranged in this manner: and do so with good depth." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, and if the cautery is oval or round."
"But sometimes the cauteries should be placed over the middle point on top of the hip joint because there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is prescribed in the cautery for dislocation of the hip joint, let it be a continuous and burning circle encompassing the entire joint."
"And this is the method of cautery in such cases when pain adheres to the hip joint but does not extend into the joint."
"But if the pain extends into the joint, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the joint over the spot where the pain is felt; and one cautery over the knee for about four fingers below the left side."
"And if using a spoon-shaped cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of heat in the joint."
"And if the pain extends to the spot near the said weights, then cauterize there with cauteries of three points or four or more as necessary."
"And if the pain extends to the area behind the knee joint, then cauterize there with a spoon-shaped cautery."
"And take care in all cauteries that you do not burn nerves or large arteries too deeply, for by doing so you may cause greater harm or contraction."
"And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the knee joint too deeply, and the leg became swollen up to the thigh, and it was necessary to make an incision and cleanse all of the flesh." "And especially in such cases fortuously occurs a solution of continuity in the belly, and especially because of that death occurs."
"And if the pain is felt on both sides at once, cauterize each side according to this method."
"And the wise men have said in cautery of the hip joint that this is the method: it should resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is about the size of one's palm, and its opening should be as thick as a date bone or slightly more."
"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be the thickness of a hazelnut shell; and those circles should be open on both sides; and their length should be about one or two nutshells, and they should have an appropriate edge made of iron for cutting around the circles; and this is its shape:"
"And especially it should be heated in the fire until it glows red and emits sparks; then place it on the part of the hip joint where the pain is felt, with the sufferer lying on their side." "And then cauterize that area with three cauteries in one session."
"And especially leave it alone for three days; and plaster it with border paste and let the wound heal openly for too many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"Albucasis says: 'O son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its appearance and because few are found who would endure it.'"
"But those who suffer from these cauteries will find relief in that place."
"However, cauterizing with medicines adherent is what you should do: make two circles having a narrow perforation in each through which the blade of the iron door key may be inserted; let their length be about two nuts or somewhat more."
"And if the space between each is as thick as a finger; and they are open on both sides and above, and are arranged between themselves in this manner:"
"And especially place it on the part of the hip joint where the pain is felt with the sufferer lying on their side, and press your hand firmly over the part of the hip joint; then take some cold water and pour it between the two circles, and gradually heat that water on a small fire for about an hour until the sufferer feels the biting sensation and adhering heat — for that sensation is like the bite of fire — until the biting sensation ceases."
"And especially raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away all of the cold water from around the hip joint with fresh water."
"And especially leave it alone for three days and then place border paste on it until the blackness of the adhering cautery is removed, leaving it like that for a few days more, and then rub some ointment on it; this is the last stage of treatment."
"And especially treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"And if the pain extends to the thigh or the buttock, do as was done for the hip joint, containing water as described."
"This is the method of cold water application, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines." "Take some alkali and unslaked lime from both sides of the hip joint, grind them together, and place them in a new bowl whose opening is pierced with a small hole according to the amount that enters into it."
"And place another bowl inverted on top of that bowl, and pour through it some warm water over the alkali and quicklime until they are covered by about one finger's depth; then press them firmly with your hand, and leave the bowl containing the cold water to drain into the inverted bowl below."
"And especially adjust all that water and pour it over some fresh slaked lime and alkali again, because this solution will be very strong and is used in many medical operations and cauterizations of other members."
"And some medicines are used for cauterizing broad areas, such as those containing turmeric and honey with the addition of vinegar and soap so that they are mixed together."
"And Galen tells of an ancient man who was cured by one session of cauterization for pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he greatly praised this treatment saying that no other cure is needed because it brought about healing in one session as told."
"And if fresh wormwood is not available, then fresh figs should be taken and ground with a little salt; then they are applied to the hip joint where there is pain, or to the thigh or buttock, and bound on."
"And it should be left on for about three hours or until the sufferer feels that the pain is beginning to subside."
"And especially put him in a warm bath and when his body is heated, then apply the cautery again, for the pain will cease and he will be healed."
"Know that these medicines should not be used for cauterizing except where there is evacuation of the body humors."
"But Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with hot pitch from a goat's horn, it is done very well; and the cautery should be applied in this manner: take some wool, steep it in old oil, and place it between the anus and the buttock."
"Next, take a dry goat's hoof and heat it in the fire until it becomes hot. Then place it on wool or linen that has been spread out." "And repeat this until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain."
"This method of cautery is called cautery of oxen."
"Chapter XLII."
"On the cautery treatment of toothache."
"Sometimes pain in the back arises from various causes, such as by fracture or blow or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to these, due to the infiltration of hot and moist matter."
"Cautery is only used in this single condition which occurs due to the effusion of hot matter."
"Therefore, evacuate the illness using pills made from figs and similar substances, which should be applied to the back where the pain is felt. Three lines down from the top of the spine, mark nine points with a pen, cauterizing or burning each point according to the severity of the illness and its strength."
"And perform cautery using a pointed cautery iron."
"If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries at a time using this middle pronged cautery."
"Chapter XLIII."
"Regarding cauterization for the beginning of baldness."
"Frequently, this illness occurs in young children. A sign that it is beginning in children is when they suffer discomfort over the surface of their scalp with redness and swelling."
"And you will see this on the last vertebra of the back, and on its ribs that have already begun to protrude above the others."
"Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize therewith a circular cautery according to this shape:" "that takes the form of an equal division across the entire surface of the vertebra."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines deep." "And let the points be close together between them."
"And then cure the place within that has been burned using what we have said."
"But be careful not to administer a cautery for baldness caused by spasm of nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
"Regarding cauterization for gout and pain in the joints."
"When pain in the joints is caused by humors that rub together and are enclosed within each member of the body, it is customary for physicians to call this gout specifically when such pains come on in the feet."
"And therefore, when gout caused by friction is cured with medicine but the pain is not removed, then it should be removed with a cautery."
"For this purpose, you should cauterize around the evacuation near the joint of the foot using several cauteries."
"And let these cauteries be olive-shaped, which have this form:"
"If it is necessary to make points on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." "And if the pains reach into the toes or other joints, and this is often the case, then cauterize thereupon around each toe with three or four cauteries of equal division using an olive-shaped cautery."
"And if many cauteries are needed for this purpose, then cauterize them and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, but only around the circumference of the joint."
"And if the pains reach into both toes, then administer the cautery which we have described in its chapter."
"And if the pains are only on one side and it is called sciatica, then make points around the buttocks as they turn, making two lines of them."
"And if the pains remain in these places, then make points around the buttocks on each side and also on the inside of the thigh."
"And if the pains extend near the knees or thighs or muscles, then cauterize all around the joints of these."
"And do not rely solely on good regimen and receipt of medicines, for even if a good regimen is followed and the disease is evacuated with this cautery alone, God willing it will be cured."
"Chapter XLv."
"Of cautery of fractures."
When there is fracture in the bones or displacement of the intestines before the animal's anus, and when this begins to happen, then you must order the patient to refrain from food on that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the wound may heal more easily.
And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath while you feel for the anus or the intestines.
And then return with your hands to where you said and try to feel the fracture on the ribs with the tip of your finger, signaling which end is like half of a circle facing upwards.
And then perform the cautery as follows:
"Until it becomes moist and releases sparks." "And then gently reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to ensure that it does not come out again."
"And you have already placed yourself between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, with other servants on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands."
"And then place the cautery on that spot with your right hand, and bring the intestine towards the opening of the wound, ensuring that you grasp the edge of the opening; repeat this process until you have successfully grasped it."
"And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during cauterization, making sure that you do not burn it so that the patient does not come to harm or suffer great injury."
"And know that if you do not grasp [the intestine] with the cautery, your operation is incomplete."
"It is necessary that the cautery used for children be thin according to their age and size."
"And then clean the wound from the cautery with warm water three times a day until the scar from the burn has healed."
"And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
"And the patient should remain in bed for forty days until the wound is sealed and the inflammation has subsided."
"It is necessary that you adjust the patient's diet according to the duration of their treatment, so that it does not empty the stomach and cause the intestine to protrude due to the effort of healing."
"And then, when forty days have passed, gradually administer solid food to them, and keep them on this diet for another forty days."
"And they should avoid strenuous work, excessive eating and drinking, and loud voices, as these things will hinder the healing of their wound."
"And now I will speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and if they are not too large, you should cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, so that it is equal to one third of the width of the intestine; and then treat it with water as we have said."
"And some earlier authors have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery shaped like this: △"
"And a line is placed that runs through the width in the side where it rises from the break, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Regarding cauterization of a twisted cord."
"When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to cautery or percussion and persists for a long time without being alleviated by medicinal treatment, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
"And let the cautery be of the size of the member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and the pain it causes."
"If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. And if not, then apply the cautery again; for those pains are often caused by punctures of a member near to where the pain is felt, so it is necessary to reach those with cauteries until the illness is healed."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Regarding cauterization of leprosy."
"Some forms of leprosy are viewed with caution when cauterized because it does not bring much benefit, and even harm if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm or melancholy."
"And therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and affected as we said in the division, and do not do it if it is so. Also fear that the corruption might spread throughout the whole body and affect all its structures. Therefore, cauterize there on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it near the forehead; two on the horns; and one behind on the nape or servants."
"And lastly, press the cautery a little deeper until it makes a small impression on the bone, and remove the scabs from there, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated. And cauterize on the chest as necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the whole body and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that one with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and with two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and with two on each ankle, and with one on each ankle bone, and with two on each shinbone, and with two on each calf muscle; and cauterize there over all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each heel of the feet, and on the hollows of the hands."
"And beware not to burn the nerves which are located above the ankle lest you harm them."
"Sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver."
"And know that the more accurately you apply cauteries, the greater the benefit and advantage. And know that the illness does not feel pain from the cautery, as it does with its own sores, because the body of that one is already stunned."
"And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as has been prescribed with regard to the species of instruments."
"Furthermore, cure the burn with powdered wheat flour mixed with honey and with other remedies until it is healed."
**Capítol XLVIII.**
**Chapter XLVIII. Cauterization for Stupidity.**
When a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, yet it does not heal, then cauterize that paralyzed limb using irons according to its size or smallness.
And introduce your cautery into the opening of the backbone slightly. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes veins are cauterized that cause weakness in the feet and legs, in the spine, and on both sides of the nerves which nourish that limb; and then the weakness disappears.
But do not presume to do this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body in motion.
Chapter XLIX
On cauterization of white patches that are disfiguring.
When white patches are old and do not respond to any medicinal ointments, then cauterize over that area with a hot iron slightly according to the quantity of the opening of the backbone so that it may remove the whiteness and change its color.
And afterwards treat that area with a mixture of powdered earth and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of sage, and dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and then apply it with a cloth on which some has been placed, and cover the location so that it may heal.
Chapter L
Cautery of the crab (i.e., treatment for gout).
When cancer begins and you want to remove that lump, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the same way as it is rotated.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the spot; but I have not seen this done because I fear that it may ulcerate, and I have seen this happen several times.
And it is then more appropriate to cauterize around the spot with a circular motion as we have said before, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 52
On the cautery of adenitis (swelling of the lymph glands).
When some adenitis is delayed in ripening, and this happens due to superfluity of that area or due to the condition of the illness, as it is old and decrepit with little blood or because of time, and you want to hasten the ripening of the adenitis; then cauterize around it with many small punctures using cauteries; and approach that area which has delayed in ripening.
But if you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and afterwards place that in the middle of the adenitis until it penetrates the cord.
And if the cautery in that area causes too much pain, so that the flesh of the arm is relaxed; then approach and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 53
On the cautery of corroding ulcers
Corroding is a wandering corruption in the member which consumes it as dry wood burns.
Therefore if you find that corroding in a place where cautery with fire can be applied, then heat cautery nails, some few and some large according to what is suitable for that area where the corroding is.
And approach it cauterizing all around until you have eradicated all corruption and there remains no cause of it left.
And leave that for three days, and apply over the cauterized places only ointment mixed with oil until all scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then cure it with living flesh applied on it.
But if after three days you find that the flesh is growing healthy without any corruption, then that's good. But if not, then repeat the cautery over what remains in the corrupted places.
And corroding can be treated sometimes with sharp medicine, for it is a halfway measure instead of cautery. But nevertheless, cautery with fire gives quicker relief.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of it by sharp medicine in its division, so take that when you begin to deal with it.
Chapter 54
On cautery of chilblains and similar afflictions
Many times it happens in the parts of the body called chilblains, which is a thick, deep-seated cause that affects the skin. Cautery can be applied to these in two ways: by fire and by hot water.
But cautery with fire is this: heat the cautery like a feather pen made of iron according to the quantity that contains the chilblain entirely, and it should be made of fine edges.
And approach that heated cautery upon the chilblain, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the chilblain until it reaches to the depth of it. Leave it for three days until it begins to discharge water. "Then apply a poultice made of wild mallow leaves chopped with salt, and leave the poultice on that area for one night, as it will draw out its roots."
"And then treat the wound with ointment made from generation flesh until it heals."
"And if it is not converted, and blisters sometimes occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then you should administer cauterization with water, using a spoon made of brass, iron or vulture's feather; place it over the boil; take a drop of boiling water in the spoon, keeping your hand still, press the margin of the spoon onto the root of the boil, allowing the boiling water to reach the center of the root; wait for the patient to endure the bite of the boiling water for about an hour, then remove it, as the boil with its roots will be eradicated."
"And do this until all of those that are on the body have come out."
"And then treat those boils from which the roots of the boils have been eradicated with ointments that cause the flesh to grow again."
Chapter .lxxv.
Of cauterization for trembling.
When trembling occurs due to friction in the nerves or from a fever caused by heat, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and apply a cautery on their foot, and on their stomach with an olive cautery.
And if the trembling subsides, it will hasten the recovery from the feverish illness.
Chapter .lvi
About cauterization of accidental injuries to the body
When the body is speckled with albati (white spots), and there are pustules from which matter is issuing that is thick and corrupt; therefore, at the beginning, it must be cauterized with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which has been heated in fire; or with a long erestological rasp; or with a lenticular cautery.
And similarly, in the case of other boils that appear later, they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; and they are not believed, nor are they opened up, but rather the excess is dissipated by doing so, and they heal.
But nevertheless it is necessary that this be done near an evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter lvi
About cauterization of accidental flow of blood by incision with an artery knife
There are often cases where an arterial flow appears that is cut through the skin where it has erupted, or from the incision of an apostema or cautery of a member, and then it resembles this, and it is difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, immediately take your hand with the artery knife and press it over that place where you saw the arterial flow issuing; pause there a little while until you see that the flow of blood has ceased from under your finger, so that it does not escape.
And immediately afterward heat in fire the olive-shaped cauteries of various sizes, whether few or many; and blow upon them until they are very hot.
And then promptly take one of those cauteries that is small or large according to the place and size of the wound in which the artery has burst; apply it there quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold it until it becomes adherent and stops the bleeding.
And if the blood is still issuing from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then immediately take another one that has been prepared in the fire; and continue to do this until the bleeding has stopped.
And be sure not to burn any nearby nerves, and let it come close to the wound but without causing another mischief.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with cautery as described above, or with extraction if it cannot be extracted (for when it is extracted, the ends of the vessel are burned and the bleeding stops), or else it should be tied with thread or linen by strong traction, or some medicine whose virtue is to stop bleeding should be applied there, and pressed upon with a compress accompanied by constriction.
But those who apply restriction with linen thread and traction with cloths or bandages by positioning cauteries and similar things, do not perform but harm.
But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor any medicine, then one should press with the tip of the finger over the orifice of that vein as described above, and apply great constriction of the area around it so that the blood may be stopped from its source; and remove the finger from the artery, and sprinkle water that has been rubbed much with a very cold handkerchief upon the artery so that the blood may be congealed and thickened; and afterwards see if cautery or medicine is necessary.
Of Incision and Perforation and Excision and of Phlebotomy and of Wounds and Their Like.
We have already spoken in the first chapter of all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine burning, and the occasions and causes for this, and the instruments necessary for them with their forms; and we have arranged the chapters concerning the head down to the feet.
And in this chapter, I will proceed similarly so that what is sought by anyone may be easily understood; therefore regarding whatever question he may ask.
But before I begin this, please note that in this chapter about cutting and perforation, you should understand that it is for terror what was said in the first chapter concerning cautery.
And for this reason, it is necessary that there should be great caution in these operations because many times evacuation takes place with blood, which carries life within itself, such as aspiration of the vein or incision over an aposteme or opening of an abscess or curettage of a wound or extraction of an arrowhead or incision of a stone and their like. And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many cases death ensues from them.
And I warn you not to fall into something that is doubtful, for sometimes it happens that one must resort to methods that are very dangerous. And among them are some who depart with their disease and it is easy for death to follow upon it; this happens because of the severity of their illness, the duration of it, and fear of that illness which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives away all his property and possessions in expectation of health but whose disease is fatal.
Therefore, do not consent to anyone who comes to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than greed and rapacity. And do not undertake any cause without first having certain scientific knowledge that will verify the matter for you, and towards which successful outcome may be hoped.
And use prognosis and diagnosis of that which leads to health in the treatment of all your diseases; for therein lies help towards acquiring fame and renown, praise and glory.
O children, may God inspire you with His understanding and not remove direction and protection from you; for this is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter divided into chapters according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that you may easily understand what you ask about and what you need.
First Chapter.
Of the Treatment of Water in the Head of Children
Know that this disease often happens to children at birth, especially when the midwife squeezes too hard on the head of the child while it is being born.
And sometimes it happens without any apparent cause which cannot be discovered.
But I have only seen this disease in children; and all those whom I saw died from it, and therefore it seems to me that it is not an easy task to deal with such cases.
I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water and his head swelled so much that he could not raise himself because of the greatness of his head; and more than this humidity caused death.
And this water is collected either between the dura mater (dural membrane) and the bone, or outside the bone on top of the skull.
For if the operation is performed in such a case where the water is between the dura mater and the bone, and the swelling is small, then you should make an incision at the middle of the head with a scalpel horizontally, and let its length be about two fingers so that the water may flow out through it, for this is the form of the spatula:
"If therefore moisture has increased more and the aposteme (abscess) has grown larger, then here are two incisions made in this manner:"
"If the moisture is gone from the eye, this is a sign that you should open up all of the commissures of the mouth widely and squeeze out water when you compress it with your thumb inside the corners and do not hide this." "Therefore, you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
"and near the incision remove all moisture;
"And there is another method of incision to consider where the size of the boil appears and how much water it contains, for sometimes they are larger at the back or at the front, on the right side or left side; therefore, make your incision where the boil appears and the collection of water ends, and then proceed according to what seems best to you."
"And make sure that you do not cut into the artery, for it will cause a flow of blood and worsen the condition due to this flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
"Chapter according to."
"When an ulcer or wound appears in the eye or on the foot, and this has lasted for a long time, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries."
"And therefore, when you wish to cut those arteries that the pain has reached its head, and near the place apply a rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and also strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and in those places above the places that are near the ears below, they hide themselves so much that sometimes it is difficult to find them in certain people."
"And then mark the artery with ink and cut each one with a scalpel of each sharp point with an incision entering into the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head."
"And if you wish, introduce the scalpel within the artery and cut that one at the incisions made above."
"And let the length of the incision be as described above, for when a vein is cut, blood issues forth with pulsating exit, which flows freely with frequent flow."
"But if the artery does not appear clearly, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingerbreadths, and then mark with ink, and cut into the bone."
"And this is what needs to be removed from the blood: about six drops. And sometimes more or less gets out, and all this depends on the quantity that appears from the power of the disease and from the fullness of the artery itself."
"And also consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the scab, then cut that off so that it does not become a cauterizing ulcer."
"And also strengthen the wound with cotton pads and cloth strips, and then cure that with ointment until it is healed."
"Chapter iii."
"Concerning the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples."
"When some ancient migraine or sharp catarrh occurs due to humidity in the temples and their quality, or when it is an ancient vehement pain similar to these, and it is treated with medical remedies but does not improve, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown above are useful for these illnesses."
"And the manner of operation and extraction of these is that when the patient has hair on their temples, you should understand the artery that appears in the temple since it is shown by its pulsation. And it is hidden only in few men due to the thickness of their hair."
"And if it is hidden to you, then the patient's head should be strengthened with some cloth. And also rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly." "And then take the scalpel of which this is the shape:" "And then cut the skin with that scalpel with ease until you reach the artery. And then open and extract it at the top part until you extract it from the skin and uncover those tunics which are below it, all along its length."
"But if the artery is subtle, then wrap its extremity with the tip of a needle and cut it open according to the quantity by which its extremities are extended and contracted. And there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not opened, the blood will not rise up completely."
"And then evacuate six to nine drops of blood from it."
"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with doubled thread of cotton or with long cords. And do not allow it to become putrid before the wound is consolidated, for this causes bleeding."
"And then cut into the excess that lies between two threads. And do so at that time or another appropriate time."
"And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery until the bone or with a small cautery until its extremities are burned. And this will take the place of that operation."
"It is better if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion, for cauteries are among those causes that help to reduce humidity, and therefore it is better in this case."
"And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries that you sprinkle the place with fine powder and then bandage it decently. And then treat it with dry medicines to make the flesh grow and with compresses until it heals."
"And if during the operation there occurs bleeding from the artery again, then stop that blood either with cautery or by pressing the place of the wound with your hand until the blood is stopped." "And if none of those causes is present, then press your thumb on the place until the blood coagulates. And then rinse the place with very cold water until the pain subsides and strengthen it as necessary."
"And that which is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two notches. For after you have opened the two places with a probe, each one separately and quickly, until they reach the bone and cut through the vein at both places, so that what lies between its extremities may be elongated, for it will not be completely consolidated by this cautery."
"This is the form of the cautery:"
"And let the sharpness of the two notches be thus:" "But nevertheless if they are small in sharpness that two notches are better, for if they are too sharp it approaches each vein and does not cut the flesh quickly."
"Therefore since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut easily."
"And this operation is better than all others and is also easier."
"And let the space between two notches be equal to the thickness of a finger."
Chapter Four
Of the treatment of tears of the eyes.
When there are acid tears and it is the case of those veins which are on the forehead of the head, and no cause of the cure by medicine can be found, sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they feel as if there were ants walking about in their forehead, and their eyelids become thin, with moisture issuing so that their lashes become stuck together, and the skin is scaled by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients used to use this operation for their cure and did not name it otherwise.
And then you command the patient to shave the hair which is on their forehead, and next you cut three incisions into the forehead equally distant according to its length. And if the length of each incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one according to the length of a little less than the movement of the lacrimal glands which are on the eyelid, and the third one from the other side.
"Beware of the entrance of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jawlines." "And if the space of each incision is as much as three fingers wide."
"If you have a sponge wrapped in linen or dry cloths with which to wipe away blood."
"And then insert the spatha between two sharp-pointed extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:" "which begins at the temple and enters into the second incision." "Carefully extract with this all the bone that is between two incisions, which lies on top of the cheekbone. Then do likewise from the middle incision into the second incision." "And then take out this spatha and insert another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
"And pause the blade of that on the adjacent flesh near the bone, and the blade of the lion within the bone. Then employ it to reach the middle fissure and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels."
"But continue the incision until you reach the bone. Then do likewise in the middle fissure into the other fissure."
"And when much blood flows from it, squeeze the places of the blood vessels together."
"And then press in each fissure a cotton ball soaked in wax, oil, and vinegar. See that there is no burning cautery."
"And on the third day, untie the ligature and apply a generous rinsing of cold water or decoction. Then dress it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other suitable substances so that the wounds may be healed."
"Chapter Five"
"For treating headaches through purging and for tears descending from internal head injuries."
"When a vein is opened with care and continuity, sometimes the eyes of the patient become weakened and inflamed, and their sight is impaired. If the eyelids are ulcerated, then hairs grow from them, and there is sharp pain in the forehead followed by severe headache. Then you know that the matter and catarrh do not come from above but from tiny veins proceeding from within."
"And the best treatment for these conditions is this: Command the patient to raise their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of it, about the width of a finger. Begin the incision at the left temple and continue it to the right one; let it be deep enough to reach the bone. Then extend your hand through the opening between the temples (which are usually covered by the muscles used for chewing), until you can feel the bone."
"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill the incision between the two lips of it with cotton wool or clean cloth." "And then sprinkle powders enclosed in wine and oil on top, so that no inflammation may occur."
"And when this is done and you see that the inflammation has decreased, then you must rub the bone where it begins to become flesh, and afterward treat it with a drying remedy which causes the flesh to be discharged, like if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony (resin), mix them together, and make a plaster out of them to apply to these wounds on the raw flesh."
**Chapter VI.**
**On the treatment of what falls into the ears.**
All causes that enter the ears are of four kinds: for it is either a mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and copper; or it is of plant origin like chickpeas or beans; or it is a fluid cause like water, vinegar and their like; or some animal.
Therefore, when a stone enters the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor enter into the ear, and it stops the ear's opening, if sometimes it moves the stone, then it distills in that certain amount of oil violet or sesame, and properly administer its extraction from there, and make it sneeze with conditions, and close the nose because of the arrival of sneezing. And properly plug in the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upwards to avoid these causes being forgotten.
And if it is not gotten rid of, then properly administer its extraction using the instrument called "gutter catheter" of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten with the instrument, that's good. But if not, then properly administer its extraction using a soft hook of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not removed by that, then make a tube of silver and insert the extremity of the tube into the opening of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube may be inserted. And properly extract it using a small bellows with strong suction, for often times with this method that we have described.
But if it is not removed in this manner, then take some salted alum or sometimes prepared with which birds are caught by taking a small quantity of it, and place it at the end of the ear, and properly wrap that well-placed spot decently. And properly insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, and properly dry out the ear from any moisture.
And therefore if it is not removed by all the causes that we have described, then you should cut that in front before an abscess or spasm occurs.
And the manner of cutting that is that you first sanctify the vein sepsis and extract the blood according to the method of its virtue, and then make that cut between your thumbs and turn the ear upwards, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear where the grease of it is pressed. And let the incision be crescent-shaped so that it reaches to the ear's lobe. And when the lobe is hardened, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and then quickly sew up the incision at that time, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the hairs that grew and became inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction. But if it does not obey your attempt at examination, then you take a fine, thin spatula according to this form: And use that spatula to perform the excision of that hair which has fallen into the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that the hair has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear. Rather, place it in small pieces and then extract them with tweezers or gentle movements, or through excision as mentioned earlier, because the extraction is facilitated by these methods.
But when water enters the ear, it is necessary that the patient sneeze at the beginning and fill their ear with a little cotton wool. Then place it on that ear in which there is water, and if through this method it is removed, then good. But if not, then take some thin lead pipes and make them red-hot over fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the opening of his ear, pressing one side of it against that part and striking another pipe with a hammer onto the one that is inside the ear. And do not cease this until all the water has been removed.
And do not cease this until all the water has been removed. And if the water is not thus removed, then you take some paper or cotton, and place one end of it into the ear while extending the other end over fire until most of it is burnt.
And then place another cotton and do this several times until all the water has been removed. Then remove it with a cannula as described above of the ear extractor.
But in the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is a small creature such as a flea or its like, cure it in the same way as we have described in the division. But if it is a large creature which causes discomfort to the sense of hearing, then administer its extraction with gentle movements and tweezers. And the cause of this is easier than all other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and treatise of distillations and yet do not succeed, then you must examine the ear in sunlight.
And if any cause of worms is seen here, then extract it with gentle movements or with fine tweezers. But if no such cause appears, then take a cannula made of bronze that is narrow at its base and wide at its top, shaped like this: And insert the fine end of this cannula into the ear according to what it can bear. Then suck with it strongly and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
But if it does not obey your examination, then fill and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said. Then administer distillations which are already proven in the treatment of worms, as you will find in the treatise on distillations.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which you should administer medicinal oils into the ear: Made of silver or brass, narrow at its base and having a small opening, and flat on top.
And let it be shaped in such a way that it fits into the concavity of the cannula where it will be necessary to apply this. "If you wish, take the wand and wrap it gently around the end of the patient's thigh. Then throw oil into the concave part of the device, or juice from some herb, or any other medicine in the tube - that one is by the ear - and then insert the wand with care above and press it with your hand with gentle pressure so that the oil is expelled into the concave part of the device and the patient feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should be gently warmed over fire beforehand." "Be sure that the liquid you distill into the ear is not too hot, for medications for the ear do not tolerate heat."
Capítulo VII
On the treatment of ear infections.
It sometimes happens that some children are born from their mothers' wombs without perforations in their ears, and this has also happened to some men. This can cause infection inside the ear due to water or flesh trapped there; sometimes this infection appears at the entrance of the ear canal and does not allow for proper cleaning, and other times it appears on the outer parts of the ear.
And that which happens at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be cleaned out easily, is usually the most difficult to treat.
But in those cases where you can see inside the ear, it is necessary for you to hold the patient's ear up to the sun and observe carefully. And if an accumulation of pus appears, then open that with a fine spatula, whose shape is like this:
If the extremity where width is desired has one sharp end and the other blunt, and the spatula has two sides Lion-like to prevent injury to the ear.
Then if the operation is performed on bare skin of the ear or face, at that time you should use fine sharp scissors and cut through that tissue with great ease until all the skin has been removed.
And if the operation is on the front of the ear, then take a thin Lion's claw, heat it in the fire for a moment, and promptly insert it into the flesh of the ear.
And therefore if you perform an operation with water where the illness appears easily, for fear of heaviness, relieve the pressure with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then press the ear with cloth according to the amount of width of the bandage you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed; or if you take wax and insert it into a syringe and sprinkle powder on it, use it instead. And if the ear becomes inflamed, then you must change the wax and replace it with another one wrapped in rose oil cerote until the inflammation is cauterized; and then care for it until it heals.
But if there is bleeding from the ear, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and press it against the ear. Then use another cure that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
Of the treatment of inflammation which occurs in the eyelids.
"Athazil causes redness in the eyelids of eyes sometimes when it is humid, sometimes it is dry."
Therefore you must have those tools ready or on hand, and unsheathe them from their sheaths, and pause over the places as described above.
But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then cauterize it with a silver lancet.
And the best cautery is near the incisions and wounds that return when there remains some cause of their opening; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Many times there appears in the eyelids of eyes some cause which is like hardness and toughness in its nature, and for this reason it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Therefore the operation in such cases is to examine if the swelling is produced inside, in which case it appears from the eyelid and is movable all around; and the cause of this is light.
Therefore make an incision with a lancet along its length, and carefully examine it all around with facility until it evacuates, and then suspend the edges with a compress and cut off that which is above.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and cure it until it is healed.
But if it is small, do not worry about it for that ointment of it restores and heals that.
And if the swelling declines towards the inside of the eyelid below, then elevate the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a compress, unless you decide on an incision; otherwise press it all around, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, know this in no cause.
And then make the incision, wash the eye with saltwater; and cure the place with something that heals until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of a boil on the upper eyelid of the eye
A boil is a swelling that occurs in the tissues of the upper eyelid, especially in children, and it causes inflammation of the eyes and often affects their sight because tears are secreted abundantly from them.
Therefore those children keep their heads constantly down and also sleep with them down; and therefore the eyelids of theirs below become humid and swollen, which is already covered by inflammation, and the presence of a boil is about to appear in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel hardness within it.
And one way of operating on this is for the patient to hold his head still with his chin down and wrap a cloth around his neck and make a circle according to the amount it contains boil all around, then place that above it and press with your fingers all around so that pus accumulates in the middle of the circle, then make an incision through the middle of the moisture with a scalpel along its length, but do not let the incision be larger than that made in trephining.
But before you cut the cord all the way through until you reach pus, because in most cases it comes out through a small opening like cheese curds.
Therefore extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outer edges and roll them between your right and left hands until it is all gone.
And be sure not to insert the scalpel into the incision, lest you damage the eye and harm it.
But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert a probe gently into the incision until pus comes out; and then extract it as we have said; and finally rinse with cloths in warm water and wine and apply them to the place and sprinkle them with powders.
And some people throw salt into the concave part of the incision in order to absorb what remains of that moisture.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess forms after the incision, then cure it with cataplasms of cedar until it is healed.
Chapter XI
On ways to examine the eye
When the eyelids of the eyes are swollen by the growth of hairs and are thickened, then they close over the eye and cause various kinds of diseases such as continuous tears and swelling of the eyelids and skin, which if not treated can lead to destruction of the eye. This is called a tactinim of the eye and it is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or with an acidic medicine as described earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by means of cannulae as I will describe.
And therefore you should hold the patient's head still with his chin down; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns easily, that is good. But if not, insert a needle into that part of the eyelid where there is pus beneath it, and make the needle penetrate upwards along the line of the eyelash near the edge of the eyelid, then pull the thread out upwards along the eyelid and turn it with the ray.
And then make an incision into the part inside the eyelid where the lashes are attached with a scalpel along the edge of the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one. Then extract the thread and place fine cotton or cloth powder on it, and sew the eyelid closed with a needle in such a way that it resembles a myrtle leaf shape.
But however, the shape should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among individuals. Therefore for those who require a large incision into the eyelid according to the amount by which it is swollen.
And then make an incision with the scalpel along the two lines that you have sewn, starting from the larger lacrimal duct and going into the smaller one. And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, make it as thick as a hair's breadth.
And then place the needle in one of the two corners of the thread, and cut all the way through. Then sew up the two lips with wax or fine linen thread, wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some adhesive substance if you wish, otherwise do not bother.
And then leave the suturing of the threads in place for three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you wish, leave the scab without suturing and cure it with something that dries and constricts because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of pus. But sewing is better. And this is what the ancients say about treating a tactinim.
But however, if there is swelling above the disease and it is easy to operate on and there is no fear in doing so.
And there is another way to treat a tactinim: sew the eyelid in a shape like a myrtle leaf and then lift the eyelid with three needles separated and gathered together in this way:
"However, if this is not possible, hold the eyelids open. If it still does not work, then take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the eye, insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and adjust the threads evenly between your fingers. Then, with those threads, gently lift your hand upwards, lifting the entire eyelid."
"Then carefully close the wound's lips using stitches, and heal what needs to be healed."
"If an abscess occurs around your incision or fissure, treat it with cerote and similar substances, and cover it gently."
"And sometimes, the eyelids' edges can turn inward. Then you must use what was mentioned earlier about incision; but suture it in such a way that it is most natural."
"To sew with a needle and thread, follow this method:" "And if you want to turn the eyelid and cut the figure as mentioned earlier, then prepare two needles or two thin threads whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is smaller than the width of the spatula." "And once you have incised both ends of each cut, keep hold of the threads."
"Then carefully bring each thread up from below the excess skin of the eyelid and tie both threads together tightly. Leave it like this for a few days, so that the thread dies and falls out by itself, and the wound can heal on its own."
"But if it takes too long, then cut the threads with scissors and carefully clean the wound, healing what needs to be healed."
"So once it is healed, the eyelid will be elevated and the hairs will not irritate it."
"And this is how you make two needles following this method:" "Make sure the length and width are neither too much nor too little."
"Chapter XII."
"Of raising irritating hairs on the eyelid using a needle when the hair is hard"
When the humors are unnatural, hard and sharp and piercing the flesh, then the operation on it is to take a subtle needle and place it in that thin vein of cedar and lion, and next you adjust its extremities and knot each one very subtly. And let the length of the veins be as much as a palm's breadth.
Next you compose another subtle vein below him quickly, and tie its extremities if you wish to.
And next place the patient's head on a cloth napkin, and let it be near the sun so that your work may be declared, because this is subtle and fine operation.
Next insert the needle into the hair root that needs to be singed, and make it penetrate swiftly into the eyelid before you extract it above the natural skin.
Next pull out the hair from above and insert that into a plaster, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more than that.
Next pull your hand away while the hair is being pulled out with the plaster in the eyelid along with the natural skin.
But if it is pulled with the plaster and the hair is not extracted, then pull the plaster to the parts below along with the vein that you have composed with that, until it is extracted from the wound above.
Then close it with the vision of the wound, because afterward you will remove the plaster and the vein, and cleanse each one carefully and dress the wound, and let them remain for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh.
And if it is too short hair, then attach a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or let it remain until it grows some space longer, and afterward you lift it.
Chapter XIII
Of the treatment of the inflammation that occurs in the eyelid above
When inflammation occurs in the wound and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above on its right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by healing of a wound or section or cautery, or by resembling their poor condition.
The manner of the operation in this case is that you cut that healing and separate the lips of it, and put on it a cloth soaked in warm water, and bind those until they are healed.
And there is no need for you to use remedies that dry it out or constrict it, because if you do this, inflammation will return worse than before and never heal.
Use in that causes that soften it, such as fenugreek, and mix it with the water in which altaea and saffron have been cooked and strained from it, or diacylglycerol, which has been liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you perforate everything that has not healed according to the original form.
And this operation that we have mentioned is simply a correction of inflammation that does not return the form of the place to what it was before.
Chapter XIV
Of the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the lower eyelid
This inflammation that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is properly called inflammation; and it can be either natural or accidental.
But accidental inflammation is caused by wounding, cutting, cautery, or other similar causes.
"To perform the operation on him: Take a needle with a doubled thread, insert it into his flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct to the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
"Then stretch the flesh at its edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle. Then cut it open with a wide spatula." "Then return the eyelid to its proper shape if possible. Otherwise, take the needle and sew up that which is torn, and with it turn over the eyelid so that both incisions are on the outer side of the eyelid."
"And when the ends of both incisions meet at two points of the cut, make sure they form a single point where they converge, so that when they come together they form a neat and sharp angle."
"And this figure is called the Greek letter lambda."
"Then take away that flesh on the side of its sharp edge towards the eyelid, so that it cuts off the eyelid."
"Then join together the separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool. Then dress it with whatever medicines we have mentioned to make it heal."
"And if you find any scar tissue from a previous incision or suture or cautery, it is necessary to cut open with a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as has been described." "Then separate with forceps between two lips according to what we have said."
"In the summary of the discourse on the treatment of scars whether above or below, it should be run through during the operation according to how the scar is prepared and shaped, which may take various forms."
"And the skilled artist always prepares in every possible way to restore the figure as close as possible to its natural form, according to what is appropriate for the operation and the instruments available, especially when there are better arrangements."
"Chapter XV."
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea."
"When this adhesion occurs in many people, it is usually due to the eyelid being stuck above with mucus from the eye. It becomes stiff and its natural movements are hindered. Therefore, you should insert the end of a needle beneath the eyelid and lift it up or stretch it out using tweezers."
"Then you should cut the adhesion with a fine, blunt spatula that is not sharp-pointed, so as not to cause discomfort during the operation. Make sure the spatula does not scrape the eye with its sharpness."
"And make your incision such that it easily severs the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed."
"And then you should put salt water into the eye with which you wash it; or distill in it juniper dissolved in water."
"Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with forceps, place a piece of wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and use consolidating ointments on the third day so that it heals."
"Chapter XVI."
"Of incision of nail and prominence of flesh from the lacrimals."
"Know that there are two kinds of nail: one is nervous and resembles hard cartilage; the other is non-nervous and resembles congealed white humor. When you touch it with forceps, if it is forced out, it should be grasped with tweezers, cut off, and the tweezers not inserted into it."
"And both kinds begin only from the larger lacrimal canal, which gradually covers the eye and blocks its light and movement."
"But the way to operate for its excision is that the patient should hold their head in place and you should open their eyelids. Then lift up the eyelid with your hand and grasp the nail with tweezers without doubling them back too much, stretching it out upwards." "Then take a needle and insert it into the nail under its skin with horsehair or cowhair or wool from oxen or sheep or strong sinew. Then gradually bend back the tip of the needle and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce it with the needle, and tie the nail with sinew. Then stretch out the nail upwards and cut off its outer side using the hair, taking care not to touch the pupil." "And then follow that same method until you reach the end of it."
"And then you should cut off the remainder in the root of the lacrimal canal using a fine spatula or small forceps. Leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal alone so that cutting it does not cause continuous tearing."
"And sometimes the nail can be stretched out with one pair of tweezers or with sinew as we have said. Then it should be cut off using a lion's claw spatula, which has this shape:"
"And take care that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture there. And also take care not to perforate the pupil."
"Then place a little crushed salt or fresh egg yolk from chicken on the eye, leaving it there overnight. Then rinse it with water that is suitable for healing so that it heals."
"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or grasp it with tweezers, sometimes this kind of nail can be cured with medications. And thus it is treated as other kinds of nail, as described in the division."
"And if you want to cut it off, then open the eyelid of the patient and take a fine lion's claw spatula with sharp points like this:" "with sharpness." "And if it becomes softened and congested and enters into its root, then distill from your mouth into the eye fresh egg yolk from chicken or honey or crushed salt. Then close the eyelid overnight."
"And then repeat the operation until everything that belongs to it has been removed. But if an opposite tumor appears on the eye, then leave that alone and treat the tumor at its beginning so that it heals."
"And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
"If a prominence of the lacrimal flesh appears in the eye as a great injury, then grasp it with tweezers and cut off one part of it without cutting all the way through so that you do not cause continuous tearing."
"And then distill honey and fresh egg yolk into the lacrimal until it heals."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of incision of styes and of anything that is born from attached flesh in the eye."
"Sometimes in the eyelids of some people flesh is born that is rough and thick, covering the pupil or approaching it and pressing strongly on the eyelids so that they stick together at their edges like a column."
"But the operation for this is that the patient should hold their head in place. Then open the eyelids of that person and grasp all of that flesh with suitable tweezers using a cimeter or forceps. Then cut off the beginning of the flesh until everything is finished without cutting into the eye during your operation."
"And let your incision be with whatever you use to cut it off, whether with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail or with small forceps according to what seems suitable to you according to this chapter."
"Then when your incision is completed and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt or distill into it powdered medicine like a corrosive and press on the eyelid from outside with egg white until there is no doubt about the cauterization."
"If some cause remains for guarding heat and there is no cautery available, and you fear an abscess will form, then leave the wound open and care for that abscess with whatever makes it yield, and soon return to treat it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the case of attached flesh that occurs in wounds of this type."
"But you should not remove all care of the wound by force or accidentally with iron tools, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the limb has tolerated that operation."
"Chapter XVIII"
"Of cauterization of the wound."
"Cauterize only the veins that are tough and visible on the wound, and forbid their operation until the wound is uncovered for several days."
"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which cauterization takes place is strong and does not have another illness besides cauterization, then you cauterize that wound."
"And you should order the patient to hold his head down toward his feet, and then suspend those veins with one or two ounces according to your discretion; and that ounce should be of fine double-folded silk according to this pattern:"
"or two ounces graduating in one body according to this pattern:"
"And then suspend those veins with fine threads, with subtlety and care, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned back."
"And be careful that you do not cut the wound with the edges of the scalpel blade; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and you are very firm in your operation, then you should only cauterize those veins."
"And when you have completed the operation, then apply to the wound fresh rue juice or decoction so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has been removed by cauterization."
"But if it is not possible for you to do this all in that hour, then you should plaster everything with what relieves the pain of it, and leave it for a few days until the pain is settled and assured against an aposteme."
"And then continue to treat it according to the most gentle manner until it is healed."
"And this is the form of the cauterizing iron:"
"Chapter XIX."
"Of the reduction of a broken nose."
When you treat burns with cautery or sharp medicine that does not follow the usual course of treatment and fails to heal, then do not attempt to enter the patient's body. Instead, open up the abscess when it is ripe, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
And once the bone has been exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then remove it with an instrument shaped like this:
And it is named "sharp head," and made of iron. Its head is round like this, with many points for fine puncturing by means of a file or aliscale.
And press that against the corrupted part of the bone, and then twist it between your fingers, gradually pressing harder until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
And once this has been done several times, then restore the area with drying and astringent treatments.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and new healthy skin has formed, and the wound has separated from the sound flesh and remains for forty days without being renewed or becoming inflamed or suffering any setback, then you will know that it has healed.
But if not, then it is necessary to reduce the wound to the shape of a nose, and do so in this way: first expose the bone using iron or sharp medicine, and once the bone has been exposed, then take a trocar made in this shape:
The outer part of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft thin and tapering to a point at its extremity like this:
Place that one over the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; extend your hand a little towards the heel, then rotate your hand with the trial in such way that it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels the pain as much air escapes through there when you move your hand.
Then, restore the place with medicinal remedies that are drying and astringent like those you have here.
Once the flesh has been cut and the place has hardened, then the material that had flowed out returns to its place; therefore, it is easier for the pain to be relieved.
Chapter XX.
Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel is entirely prominent and no deformity or diminution has occurred, then you should loosen the pain, follow it up closely, and pause often on the Achilles tendon without scarification and suck well; place a liniment made of acacia, aloe, iris, and tragacanth on the heel, and apply the plaster with plenty of powder.
And the manner of preparing the powders is that you take cloths of linseed meal, each cloth folded into four layers; and make them with those meals.
And place one cloth on top of the other according to the amount necessary for the heel. Strengthen with rough cloth with strong constraint; repeat the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove them, leaving the wound tight day and night.
If in the meantime the ligament softens, it is necessary that it be very tight.
And remove the ligaments again during the day and night as we have said.
And if sometimes the wound is already reduced, that's good; otherwise, then repeat the plaster with powders and constraint and cupping glasses until it is healed.
Chapter XXI
Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the eye
When there is a rupture in the tunic of the eye and it is prominent and protruding outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, if you want to incise that prominence, then proceed as follows: introduce the needle into the edge of the eye at its lower part and bring it out above; then insert another needle on the side towards the lacrimal gland and let this one penetrate first while allowing the first needle to follow its course; finally, incise where the double thread is located and lift up the edge of the tunic with that thread, pulling it tight.
And then remove the needle and place a bandage soaked in egg white on the wound, allowing the thread to remain inside with the eye.
And then dress the wound with what will comfort it until the inflammation is healed.
And sometimes it happens that the whole prominence is gathered together with a cloth circle around the wound, and then it is punctured with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the wound, allowing the whitish humor to flow out, and then the wound closes quickly.
And then compress until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
Of the treatment of corneal ulcers
This condition called corneal ulceration is nothing more than a moist humor that appears on the eye like descending water, but it is not so.
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared seat and then take your hand in both of yours and press the eye until you see the humor rise towards the lower part; then dry it up so that it does not flow down again, and keep the eye shaded from light, and the patient will see well as before.
And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with what has been said, then press the eye between your hands and take a fine spatula and stick it into that place where the panicle surrounds a little above the continuity of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea at the top (where it wants to), until the humor is expelled.
And then when it is expelled, immediately distill into the eye a drop of water in which you have mixed honey or a decoction of fenugreek and honey.
And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
"The treatment of descending water from the womb."
"We have already discussed the types of urine and their division, as well as which one is appropriate to collect, clearly stating it according to health."
Now you must hold the patient firmly between your hands over a cushion and tie their head so that they cannot move.
And accordingly place your left hand close to the eyelid of their left eye if the water is in the left eye; or place your right hand there if it is in the right eye.
And accordingly with your right hand take a cotton pad if the wound is on the left side; or with your left hand if it is on the right side.
And accordingly bring the tip of the cotton pad close to the corner of the eye towards the thinner side of the lacrimal bone, and gently press it down with your hand on that point.
And accordingly penetrate into the eye socket until you feel that the cotton pad has reached the back of the wound cavity.
And make sure that the length of the cotton pad reaches from the front to the back of the eye socket cavity so that it touches the pupil at the end of the blackness, i.e. at the corner of the eye; because you will see the pupil clearly with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
And accordingly press the cotton pad into the location where the water is present; and then pull it down a few times quickly, and usually the water will descend immediately. Therefore, if the eye pain decreases immediately afterwards, this indicates that the eye has been cured of its ailment and the cotton pad has absorbed the water from within the eye socket cavity.
And accordingly pause for a moment; and if the water has descended, then carefully pull out that other cotton pad making sure not to push it back in again.
And therefore, if the water does not descend, then carefully remove the cotton pad with ease, and gently wipe around that area with your hand little by little; and dissolve a small amount of rock salt in some water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and afterwards close the eye with a cotton wool soaked in rose oil or chamomile oil and bandage it on top.
However, those of our time pause here upon this matter treated with albumen of egg white.
And if the cotton pad does not penetrate into the eye due to its hardness -- for some men have very hard eyes -- then you should take the curette called "alberid" which has this shape:
And therefore, pierce with that curette into the conjunctiva, and do not push your hand too far in; otherwise if you cannot reach it with your fingers, make a small opening to allow the cotton pad to enter more subtly.
And then insert the cotton pad as we have described.
You must complete your work, ensuring that the patient's resting place is prepared, a dark house made where they can sleep on their back, and all movements are prohibited.
Pause in the nature of water to clarify its nature, do not move your head towards the right or left side while doing so.
And let it be placed according to its disposition within the third day.
Leave him alone in that dark house and expose him to the clear light, then show him certain reasons, and return the thread on the seventh day.
Do not do this during the time of healing or immediately after the infusion. You must do this carefully, ensuring that water flows gently rather than violently through the tube.
But if an abscess occurs, it is necessary to drain the wound on the seventh day and correct the treatment with water that will reduce the abscess.
Now you cover his eyes and pause over his mouth so that his breathing can be regulated, letting him rest in the dark house for a few days.
Then gradually remove him from that dark place and discuss with him the reasons behind it.
Remember that in alchemy, the apprentice is sometimes deprived of sight for a few moments, and at times you will need to be daring regarding the operation.
And now we have reached the stage of those who are called alchemists, among whom one said that fire should be made in Al-Ayrakh, pierced with a hole through which water is sucked.
But until now, nothing like this has been seen in our land, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients. Perhaps this is a new invention.
And these are some of the forms of magnification used to accomplish that which eludes the ignorant:
These are made of iron or steel, properly tempered, and their extremities are cut in this triangular subtlety with the point being as sharp as this form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh removed from the nose.
When flesh grows in the nose, causing blockages or polyps due to excessive mucus or other causes, this condition is called polyposis, resembling that sea creature. And the flesh is cancerous, pale, and of dark color; but in some cases it is lion's flesh, not of dark color.
So in cases where it is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you should squeeze the lump between your hands and expose it to the sun, open his nostrils, and pierce the tumor with a needle. Then carefully extract it from the nostrils and precisely cut that which you have grasped with a sharp, subtle spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; but if any cause remains why excision is possible, then remove it with one of the delicate instruments easily without leaving any cause behind. But if there is hemorrhage or an abscess has formed, then pause and do what is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant kinds, then cut it out and cauterize the wound until bleeding stops and all cavities are exposed.
Then sprinkle powdered myrrh and water or wine into the nostrils after the incision has been made. But if the nose is open and there is no longer moisture entering the palate, then you will know that it is healed.
But if moisture does not enter as it should, then you will know that flesh has grown in the furrows of the nasal bones where excision has not been performed.
Therefore you should insert fleabane into it where there is thickness and squeeze it with many nuts, pausing between each one the length of your finger or more, and generate heat around it, inserting one end of the fleabane into the nostril with fire or another cause that is possible for you.
And after this has been done, let him throw his scent into the air until it reaches the canals of the nostrils and let him exhale onto his cloak, as children often do at school, for it is an easy task to accomplish.
And then pause the two extremities of the fleabane, one outside the nose and the other inside it, and carefully apply pressure with your nuts where there is flesh around the fleabane, doing this until you know that the flesh has been crushed between the nuts of the fleabane.
And then remove the fleabane and pause for one day to abstain from blood, doing this for three days or more until the corrosive salve has destroyed all that remains of the flesh.
And at the end of treatment, pause in the nose a lead canula for several days until it is healed.
But if you want a drying cure, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge," with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
And make it of silver or brass, resembling a small open lamp like a small cone, with its mouth likewise shaped.
And if you wish, make a closed canula like a pipe, and the opening of the instrument for making capipurge should be flat and uncovered; have a handle at the end of it with which you hold it when you pour oil or any other substance that you want from the juices and subtle causes.
Chapter XXV
Of tumors that grow on the outer parts of the nose
Many times a tumor grows on the outer parts of the nose, and it is magnified and augmented in several days until it becomes a great burden to behold.
And therefore you should cut it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then pause there with fire or cautery or some burning medicine which is applied to that place.
If its incision is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it is hardened, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron for it is a cancerous ulcer; for many times those who incise this ulcer end up doing great harm to the one they had intended to help.
And if the ulcer is of lion-like touch and not dark in color, and sometimes incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and incise without fear, and dress the wound with something that dries and constrains until it heals.
Chapter XXVI
On the suturing of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been lost due to plague or injury.
Know that when such a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little confidence should be placed in that operation by certain men.
Therefore, when it happens to someone that there is some cause of these, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures, and afterwards dress it so that it heals.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should cut off each part of its apparent connection until there comes out no blood. And then approximate the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over those sprinkle dragon's blood powder and a little incense, and place on top of it a piece of plaster made from diachylon or some other consolidative plaster, leaving it like that for two days or three, then remove it and change the plaster, allowing the wound to heal by itself. Afterwards dress it with ointment until it is healed.
But the manner of suturing is that you approximate the solution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the belly, or with thread as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII
Of the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips in wounds.
Frequently it happens to many men that in the wounds of their lips there appear hard abscesses resembling boils of ears, some small and others larger.
It is necessary to convert each of those hardnesses by turning the lips and splitting them open with a sharp tool, then fill the space with sage steeped in wine until blood clots, wash it with vinegar, then dress the wound with an astringent so that it heals.
Chapter XXVIII
Of the incision of attached skin on the gums.
If a granuloma appears on the attached gum, which they used to call an albulus, you should suspend it with tweezers or hold it with your fingers and incise it in its entirety, allowing the pus to flow out and the blood to coagulate.
And then apply sage steeped in wine or other astringent powders or ointments to the wound.
And if that skin returns again, you should incise it once more and cauterize it with a hot iron, for then it will not return.
Chapter XXIX
"Due to iron teeth."
"If on the surface of the teeth between the interdental spaces and those in front, as well as between the gums, rough, sharp, and sometimes blackish scales appear, with green or yellowish-yellow color seen through the gum, this is a sign of decay and the teeth are loose."
"And therefore you should seize the patient between your hands and place their head in a cloth tie, and scrape the teeth on which those scales appear and cause similar sand-like grains to appear without causing any damage, and this is due to the blackness and yellowness and other discolorations."
"So if this is the end of that which was at the beginning of the reason, well then. And otherwise, you should repeat the reason on those another day and again on the third day until it comes to the final statement in that which you want."
"And know that teeth require various types of tools with different shapes and forms according to what is prepared for your operation." "And therefore take the tool with which you scrape the tooth from its interior and know that it is different from the tool with which you scrape between teeth according to other forms. And these forms of tools should be prepared by you, as you will see soon."
"Chapter XXX."
"Tooth extraction."
"The cause of toothache and its pain is due to the harmful humour that corrupts it. When this humour is eradicated, there is no reason why the toothache should persist, for it is a subtle substance that causes pain during eradication."
"Therefore, when a patient comes to have a tooth extracted, you must be firmly assured which is the aching tooth. For often the pain seems to come from another place and you extract one while the pain continues until the diseased tooth has been removed."
"So when you are certain which tooth is aching, then you should scrape around it with a spatula having some virtue until it has dissolved from the gum completely. Then remove it with your fingers or fine forceps gradually until it comes loose."
"Then take large forceps for good grasp or strong pressure and hold the head of the patient between your thumbs so that he does not move it. Then extract the tooth straightly so that you neither break it nor cause greater pain."
"And if it has not come out yet, then take one of those instruments and place it on the outside of the root with ease and force to facilitate removal as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is decayed or rotten, then you must fill that decay with wax and strengthen it with a thin wire at its extremity so that it does not break when you grasp it with forceps."
"And you must work carefully with your scalpel around the entire gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it nor cause it to separate from its root. Then return to the patient because sometimes the second pain is greater than the first."
"And beware of doing what many ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity to extract teeth without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses upon men which are harder to treat than the tooth itself, and sometimes they leave behind roots or pieces of them, or even extract a tooth with some bones from the jawbone as we have often witnessed."
"And when extracting it, wash the mouth with hot vinegar or vinegar and salt."
"And if there are flows of blood from this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it on the wound. If the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it."
"The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which you should grasp the tooth at the beginning should be long in their extremities, short in handle, and thick so that they do not bend when working with them."
"And they should be like tongs with a thick handle within which, when you squeeze them, they are not bent. Their extremities should be short."
"And they should be made of Indian steel, straight in their extremities. In the extremities of these there should be teeth which interlock with each other and squeeze by descending force. Sometimes the extremities of these are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia,' that is to say, they are narrow and have great constricting power."
Chapter XXXXI
Of the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Jaw Bones That Are Impacted.
When extraction of a tooth that is tightly fixed requires some cause,
"The extensions of their limbs are made like lime or scissor cuts."
"And if you do not obey this order with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut the skin and expose all the flesh, and insert this tool called 'atal', which is a small lever shaped like this:"
"And its short end should be thick and not bent so that it is not broken."
"So if by this the skin is opened, it's good. But if not, help yourself with these other tools whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first tool is triangular at the end, which should have some thickness:"
"The shape of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a very fine tip."
"And then you are helped by this tool, which has two branches shaped like this:" "and with other tools that are sharp like teeth. For help is done with this tool which resembles a large eye, and its shape is this:"
"of the twisted or short triangular tip, which should have some thickness and not be bent so that it is not broken."
"And you should know that tools with moving teeth are similar to other instruments."
"But the wise and subtle craftsman finds for himself according to what the operation means to him and the various illnesses. For there are illnesses for which the ancients did not give or set down proper instruments due to the diverse shapes of the species."
"But if the bone of the mandible or other bones of the mouth is broken or dislocated, then it should be carefully handled with whatever instrument seems convenient to him for gripping and extracting the roots of teeth, as we have said before. And help yourself with this gesture whose shape is this:"
"And little by little it should have some thickness and be squeezed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely reset. And then restore the location with appropriate medicines."
"But if there is a small dislocation in the bone, then remove that dislocation and its darkness, and cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter XXXII."
"Of the treatment of prominent teeth above the others."
"When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape, especially in women and even more so in venerable elderly women. Therefore you should consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth and it cannot be corrected with medication or a splint, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument whose shape is like this: it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip."
"And your incision should be made over three days so that it does not cut into other teeth due to the hardness of the tooth."
"And if a prominent tooth is extracted by grinding, then grind it with an Indian steel file whose shape is like this:"
"And it should be made of Indian steel and very sharp-edged. And its ends should be made with many small points like the teeth of a comb, with which the tooth is ground little by little over several days with ease, so that other teeth are not cut or damaged." "And finally polish it off and remove it with tweezers."
"And if it is a tooth from which one part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you should grind that edge until its sharpness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue does not hurt or speech is not impaired."
"Chapter XXXIII."
"Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil."
"When teeth are broken by concussion and removal due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot eat because of it, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are held together with gold foil and not silver foil, since silver tarnishes quickly and may corrode within a few days, but gold never changes."
"And the foil should be so subtle and thin according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. And the method of attachment is this: take the foil and take twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then curve it with two twists of the foil between the broken ones, or more if there are many, until the foil reaches the other half of the tooth." "And then repeat the wrapping until you reach the beginning of the broken part. Do this with your hand with ease and skill so that it is not further broken."
"And your tying should be done between the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out."
"And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and press them together in each place with gesture. And turn them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one so that they do not cause injury to the tongue." "And leave it like this for three days."
"But if it becomes loosened or broken, then fasten it again with more foil in the same manner at all times."
"And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in these drawings:"
"And when it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after falling, and have been restored as we have recommended, but they become loose again."
"This is done only by skilled and knowledgeable artisans."
"And sometimes it is appropriate to use bone from cattle for this purpose. It should be fashioned in the shape of teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
"Chapter XXXIV."
"Of cutting the frenulum that comes on the tongue and inhibits speech."
"This ligament which lies beneath the tongue sometimes is natural to some people or occurs accidentally and happens due to a hardened plaque."
"The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth while his head is tilted back. Then raise his tongue and cut that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment."
"But if there is hardness or toughness in that ligament and this has occurred due to hardened plaque, then take an iron nail and cut it lengthwise until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the toughness."
"And be careful not to make a wound in the front of the flesh, and cut here carefully so that there is no blood flow."
"And then rinse the incision site with warm water or vinegar or hot water, and then place a piece of linen beneath the tongue. This is the method that should be used to hold the patient's tongue in place each night so that it does not become hardened again."
"But if there is bleeding, place a wet piece of gauze on the site. But if it continues to bleed, then cauterize the site with a silver nitrate stick which should be used for this purpose." "And then treat it according to the other causes until it is healed."
"Chapter XXXV."
"Of removing a ranula from beneath the tongue."
"Sometimes it happens that under the tongue there is an accumulation resembling a small boil which prevents the tongue from moving naturally, and when it grows large, it fills up the mouth."
"The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth while he is facing the sun and examining the accumulation."
"If you find it to be of ash-gray or blackish hue, hard, when the patient lacks sensation, then do not touch that part as it is gangrenous."
"If it is declinated towards whiteness and humidity, then insert the onion into it, and cut that thin skin, cutting it completely; if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then stop quickly, using vinegar as astringent, so that the blood may be restrained."
"And finally, return to your work until you have completed it, ensuring that the wound is washed with vinegar and salt; then apply the other cure with water until it heals."
"Chapter XXXVI."
"Of the extraction of an abscess from both ears and that which is located in the navel, and of other abscesses."
"When a swelling occurs in the navel area, these are glands which accumulate at times, and when they occur externally, they are called 'ears,' which when cured with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, ash-gray in color, with little sensation, then do not touch that part with iron."
"And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch that part with iron because of the flow of blood. Let it remain until it ripens, and then you will remove it yourself or it will break open by itself."
"And if it is white in color, hard, and its root is thin, then that one should be incised."
"And the operation on it is that you consider whether the abscess has already rested and been filled with matter or if it has decreased somewhat. Then do the cutting before sunrise, with the head of the patient lying down and his mouth open, and let the surgeon take between his hands and press the tongue of the patient gently with a very fine instrument, which is shaped thus:"
"And it should be made of silver or bronze and should be thin like a scalpel."
"Then when you press on the tongue with that instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, cut on it lightly at first, then grasp it with forceps and put it in the pan of water, and pull it outward as much as possible." "After that, if you tear any skin, then immediately cut on it with this instrument which is shaped thus:"
"After that, if you tear any skin, then immediately cut on it with this instrument which is shaped thus:" "And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved so that the tip of each is directed towards the other, very sharp, made of iron with a copper coating."
"But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a scalpel which has the following shape: it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And after you have cut one abscess, then cut the other according to this same manner of cutting, and immediately wash out the wound with warm water."
"But if there is a flow of blood, wash it with water decocted from marjoram leaves or myrtle leaves and similar remedies for stopping bleeding until the flow of blood ceases, and then dress the wound until it heals."
"And sometimes other abscesses appear around those two ear openings, and cut them according to what I have said regarding the incision of two equal abscesses."
"And I had previously treated a woman who had an abscess which had appeared in her groin area, which was dark in color and without sensation, having closed the opening of it, and she was breathing with great difficulty and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and if there had not been some intervention on that day or the next, she would have died."
"And the abscess had grown so much that it had broken through two places and issued forth through two tracks."
"So I treated her surgically and remained at one of those places, and drew that out, but it was such a large piece that it could not be entirely removed. Then I cut into the place where I understood the other track to be, and immediately opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, and placed forceps on that abscess."
"And then you cut away a large part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it." "Therefore the woman's groin was completely healed, and she began drinking water immediately, then took food. And I continued cutting that abscess many times over a long period, but another abscess kept appearing in its place, which cut into the same track."
"So I went away and cauterized her groin with a hot iron, so that there would be no further addition of it. And then I wandered around and did not know what God had done for her on my account."
"Chapter XXXVII."
"Of the incision of the uvula when it is abscessed."
"When catarr descends to the uvula and it becomes abscessed and elongated, then it is called 'penduncle'; but if it is thick and round at its base, then it is called 'bubble'."
"But when it is cured with what we have said in the division and its cure does not confer, sometimes it happens that an abscess which has already cauterized remains there and is subtle. Then you should cut into the one that is attached roundly; and if it is of that length, and is bleeding, of dark color or black, and without sensation, then you should be cautious about cutting it, for there is fear concerning its illness."
"And when you find it according to the manner that I have described regarding its whiteness and length, then make an incision into the illness and press its tongue with this instrument whose shape is thus: and then place forceps on the new one, pull that downwards, and cut into it with one of these instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two abscesses."
"And you should not cut into it any more than what is appropriate to its natural term without addition, for if you cut into it more, you will harm its speech."
"And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two abscesses, and dress it until it heals."
"But if the illness is frightened by its incision, then you should use a hot iron in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not other than with sharp water. And this is how you do it: take the head of the illness in your left hand, press its tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, take some of the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, convey it with that live cause, and pause it on neither thick nor subtle [skin], and with that fill up the concavity of this instrument whose shape is thus:"
"The exterior of that concavity in which the medicine is placed should be like the concavity of a spoon's back, and place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula, so that the illness may turn towards its own side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth descends through the concave medicine onto the groin area."
"And then place your hand on the medicine and press it on the uvula for half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and softened by the biting of the medicine."
"And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula made from over until the cotton adheres to that cannula. Do this several times until you achieve what you desire regarding cauterization of the uvula, then leave it alone for three or four days."
If you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then cleanse the cauterization around the vein with a hot iron wrapped in wool, modify the area of the medicine with that water, wash it with warm water, and dress it outside with an ointment, and afterwards with bandages until it is healed.
This type of treatment was considered successful for many years due to fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with a substance so subtle that it cauterizes and incises, because it heals by means of fumigation in this manner: take calamentum, hyssop, origanum, ruta, scicados arabici, camomilla, bruyera and similar herbs of these kinds, and adjust all or some of them in a vessel, and let them soak in sour wine and boil; and the vessel should be well sealed with clay, and placed in the middle of the vessel is a tripod over which is placed a perforated funnel made of silver or brass.
And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula, so that it can soften and loosen it.
And repeat this treatment several times until it is dry, but be careful not to do this at the onset of an inflammation, as it would irritate the inflammation too much. Instead, you should declare the inflammation with the cauterization.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then you should take a reed and fit its extremity with a close of wool, so that the mouth of the patient can be covered. Because the close of wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii
Of the extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Many times adhesions are seen in the groin or spine of the foot or some other cause.
Therefore, you must extract that which is apparent from among those [adhesions], over which the sight falls, because when you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, it will be declared to you what is in the groin.
And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the groin, you must make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, because it easily removes the cause attached to the groin if forgotten by vomiting; or else let the patient swallow a piece of bread dipped in oil or lettuce juice or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge soaked in lion's bile and tie that strongly with fennel, and make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where its spines are extracted, they will be forgotten. And more: take an eel and tie it with fennel and let it be inside the patient, and suddenly extract it; or else take a sieve and suddenly place it [on the groin], and suddenly remove it.
Moreover, if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten from there, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
And let it be bigger than a small pea, and at its end have a concavity which you can easily insert into the groin.
"The physician shall raise the patient's head upwards and ensure that no contact is made between the patient's mouth and throat, lest it lead to coughing or spitting out of bones or spine, or that which the physician touches with his hand."
However, if the patient happens to swallow it better, then through his knowledge of the location and cause of the obstruction, he should make him cough downwards and pull out his hand along with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity that was previously prepared so that none is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX
Of removing blood clots from the throat.
When bloodsucking has been treated with what we have said in the division on cure with medicines and it does not help, then consider the hours of the day when the throat of the patient is towards the sun, because you should have prepared the tongue of it with the instrument that we have mentioned.
Therefore, if you find a blood clot, remove it gently with tweezers or with skillful movements using your fingers.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it in that way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place within the concavity of the cannula an iron wire heated red hot, and do this several times (until the blood clot dies and leaves the throat), and afterwards withhold from the patient water all day.
And then take a bladder full of warm water, and place the mouth of it over his mouth, and wash his mouth with that; and do not let any cause him to swallow, for blood clots hate water.
But if it is forgotten what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafetida through the instrument which we have mentioned in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this until it passes.
And another method of operation in fumigation of it is that you take an earthenware pot in which there are burning coals and the pot is covered with a lid in the middle of which there is a tube, and the extremity of the instrument is placed in that tube; and then give the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood clot, for the blood clot will soon fall.
And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and withhold from the patient water to drink, and let him eat salty foods and hot ones, and do not let him drink water, and this regimen must be observed for a few days.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is removed from the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps thus much, except that it has some curvature: which is placed in the throat, and its extremity resembles the beak of an ibis, which is blunt, so that when it takes hold of something, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In this chapter is the summary of what has been said about incisions and punctures of abscesses and their openings.
Abscesses are many species, of many kinds, according to the memory of them in this book.
And they are diverse in incision and puncture of them by two methods, one of which is for the species of internal abscesses, and by that which we understand about humidity.
And the second method is for those places where accidents of the body occur, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy place is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment by operation.
And moreover, there are abscesses which should not be punctured until maturity of the skin in those or completion of them.
Some abscesses must be opened when they are crossed, and not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when it is near a joint its being is prolonged until one puts pressure on what is in the circuit of it, and often its ligaments or nerves are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay opening it until it is matured, it will harm the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, therefore open it immature so that you do not tear the skin of it nor elongate it to the parts inside the buttocks, and make a fistula or one which cannot be healed in its term. But you should know the time of opening an abscess, and that is when it is matured.
And know that it is mature when there is relaxation of pain and cessation of fever, and before the decrease of heat and pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know that you should open it where there is more pus, near the abscess, and where pus comes from curing the elevation.
And opening is always done along the length of the flesh or body if abscesses are in the parts of the breast or thighs and the joints, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally in all other places where reflection does not occur.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave opening it until digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you open it beforehand, the body of the pus will be prolonged and much dirt will accumulate, and often the lips of it will become hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses are opened across the width of the flesh or body according to necessity, or according to what that limb needs.
And you should make small openings, and in large abscesses make a large opening or many incisions according to the diversity of their size.
And there are some abscesses in which the chain should be curved and cut when it is done thus as with bread, and when it is done it sticks until it is healed, such as those that occur in swellings of the glands and buboes.
And among those are ones that are incised with three angles; and among them are ones which are incised like the figure of a mitre leaf, such as those of hernias.
And among them are those in which round incision and crescentic incision are administered, resembling these.
But that one to which it is not suited like those abscesses on the surface should be opened with a superficial opening or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should open it but do not try to remove all the pus at that time; having removed some of it, pack the abscess again the next day and gradually remove more each time until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is a child with vertigo, or a pregnant woman, or a small infant, or an elderly person in decrepitude, because often the vital spirit is weakened by the exit of pus and death occurs. Therefore be cautious!
Therefore be careful with this chapter and also the opening you make when opening these abscesses. Be sure to cleanse the edges of the wound and consider whether the edge of the abscess is small or has a flat section, then apply the appropriate dressing according to that. If the abscess is large and the incisions are many, then pause between each pull until they drain together.
"When an abscess bursts, releasing part of the chain or having its concavity opened in the area, then you should fill it with lint thread or cloth thread, just as when you pull out bread loaves or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then proceed and treat it until it heals."
"If blood flow occurs during the operation, then you should administer water and vinegar mixed on a cloth of linen, and place it on the location of the bleeding several times."
"If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and care, and powders that have been recommended in many places of this book and division."
"But if it is wintertime, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should mix powders in hot vinegar and oil, and place them on those locations."
"And if it is summertime, and the locations are fleshy, then you should place powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all of that should be done within three days, as we have said, and then you should release the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to its care whatever is appropriate until it heals."
"And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already spoken about each abscess in particular manner through chapters singularly."
"Chapter XLII."
"Of Incision of Abscesses that occur on the Neck."
"On the neck of the child, there are small abscesses and types of knots that contain tunics which are made from them; and the types of them are many."
"And among them are pimples, and those that contain moisture similar to lime." "And among them are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble each other; and among them are those that are rocky and hard."
"And in the section of all of them, and in their extraction, there is no fear, for their extraction does not cause any pain."
"And the operation in sectioning them is that you spread them apart with an instrument whose shape is shown approximately here, which is called 'entromes,' until you know what they contain."
"But if what it contains is moisture, then you should cut it open with a section along its length through a superficial section according to this form:"
"And begin the section at line B to line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that out which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for otherwise viewed abscesses return if something remains."
"And then immerse it in Egyptian pitch, if available, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it until the next day, for with this you will corrode all that remains of that skin."
"And then iterate over that wound with Egyptian pitch a second and third time if necessary until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then dress the wound with ointment until it heals."
"And if an abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it according to this form:" "with a section having the shape of a cross, and make an incision between both lips of the section and scrape it all out, and use your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it."
"But if there is any pain to you, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly do with the stony abscess in sectioning and treating it according to what we have said; for sectioning a stony abscess is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
"And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with whom there is no moisture at all; and this cause is that once someone incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it to be like a deaf stone, rough and white, which could not be broken open. And if anyone were struck by that, he would have been injured."
"But in other accidental abscesses in the head except for this one, it is not like that. Thus, the section of these all should be a superficial section."
"And pause the perforation of those whose bottom part is low because it may alleviate the body from the lower parts."
"And then treat them with whatever is appropriate for their treatment."
"Chapter XLII."
"On the section of scrofula that occurs in the neck."
"Many times these abscesses occur in the collar, in the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body."
"And those that occur in the collar are many and are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is inside its own tunic, just like in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have said."
"And the species of these scrofula are many because among them there are some stony ones, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment."
"Therefore in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the touch, whose color is close to the color of bone, and is soft all over, not annexed to the nerve of the neck or the veins or the artery, and not prominent, it is necessary for you to incise it with a superficial section from above to below on the body from line G to line B. Then scrape it out entirely, and extend the lips of the bone with forceps, or with several forceps if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little."
"And be especially careful not to incise any veins or nerves."
"And do not use a sharp spatula, for it may cause your hand to slip during the incision or worsen the disease. And do not incise anything that does not need to be incised; because if you were to incise a vein or an artery and hinder yourself from your operation, then pause with a vetriol plaster or other powders which stop bleeding, and apply it, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess has paused and the wound has softened and begins to heal." "When blood is cut off."
"So return to your operation once it is completed."
"And then inquire with the little finger whether there are any other small scrofula remaining. Then incise those and clean them."
"If it is near a large vein, then do not incise that scrofula from its root." "Then apply the wound with doubled bandage strongly and leave it until it falls off on its own without harm."
"And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already subjected to Egyptian pitch, and treat it."
"If you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary for you to approximate the two lips of the wound and dress it soon after so that there remains no excess."
"But if you see that there remains excess because of the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to intend to incise the root of that, and draw it out and apply stitches and whatever else is said."
"And those of the scrofulas that contain moisture, perforate them with a superficial perforation where you see their point of maturation, and pause the perforation until the pus has come out from inside the body, as we have said."
Approach administering perforation, using hot water and cloths similar to those used for cautery. And when the wound is cleansed, then you should cure it with warm water of carnation flowers until it is healed.
Capítulo XLIII
Of the incision of the point of an accidental aposteme within the scrotum.
It was said by the ancients that this section is made in the epiglottis; yet we have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those people
But in men who have a squinting eye, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis since by this there is not made any improvement and all the veins and the major blood vessels are here.
But in those who have apostemes cauterized in the mouth or scrotum or ears, when the illness is not on the skin, it is advisable to avoid section of the epiglottis to escape the damage that is done by perforation.
Therefore when we want this, we should incise the epiglottis at three circles of the rings of the epiglottis, or four with a small section across its width in that which is between two rings by quantity, so that the incision is made in cartilage and not in the cartilage itself; and this place is convenient for section because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are far from it.
And if the doctor is fearful, he should beforehand extend the cord of the scrotum with a hook, and carefully cut the cord within until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if any are visible.
And then incise the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is indicated by the swelling above the section of the canal, which is of that fluid and of what comes out from its disruption and by the absence of voice.
Leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, approximate two lips of the edge of the wound and leave that alone be the cartilage.
And then apply medicines that cause flesh to grow within so that it may heal.
"Albucasis said that the summary of our discourse is this: Some of these ulcers have already closed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death; the breath of the patient has been cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe on the place of the ulcer by some respiration, and thus be saved from death."
"You should thus let the ulcer heal inside until the evil of the illness is consumed. The evil lasts for three days. Then you should dress it thus, and care for it until it heals."
"I saw that a servant took a knife and put it in her throat and cut out a part of the lung's bronchus. I was called to cure her, and I found her moaning like one dead. I uncovered the ulcer and drew out the blood which was flowing from the ulcer."
"Therefore I was forced to confess that she had not cut any vein nor artery, and the wind issued from the ulcer. And I cured her thus until she was healed."
"And it did not happen to the servant that any air came out of her throat. And after some days she returned to her usual state of health."
"Now you say that there is no danger in cutting into the epiglottis."
Chapter 44.
Of an incision for an aposteme that happens outside of the throat, which is called a thyregocele (thyroid goitre).
This aposteme named thyroid goiter is a large aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it happens in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
"It is not Nature's way to heal."
"And accidents occur in two ways: the first is similar to solid tumors, and the second is similar to an abscess that occurs due to the rupture of an artery; this one is dangerous." "Only in that case should one act presumptuously with iron." "And then examine it carefully and see if it resembles a solid tumor, and if not suspended on any of the veins, then cut into it like a node and remove whatever is inside with water and scissors. And otherwise, carefully investigate its entire being, and promptly treat the wound with what is needed for healing until it heals."
Chapter XLVI
"On the section of the various types of tumors."
Of the many species of joints, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And since you ask thus for the difference between joint and outlet with doubt
Therefore you say that in outlet there is heat and fever and violent pain within when the boiling of the excess fluid stops; and it is full putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But in joint there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that thick fluid which is in the proper bladder.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a haze and it becomes thus like emptiness, whether greater or lesser, and there are two species, for some are thick and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the cure of joint, that you remove it and investigate it at its beginning with an instrument which is called "intromes," according to what its form will come in the chapter which is appropriate for this.
And it is the manner of investigation of boils and of all joints, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place which you find in the boil, and you turn your fingers with that little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin.
And then lastly, according to the measure of the size of the boil, extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the tract of it.
And if running moisture has been forgotten, whatever its color may be, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in the case of other boils.
And if from the tract of the intromes there is no moisture, then know that it is thick (grassa).
If it is dry above it with a section having the form of a cross in this manner: Thus as you have shown, suspend that with hooks and tear out the chain from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or bag, if possible, over it and draw out that fluid.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to draw out that fluid. Many times there remains some inside and then you draw it out piece by piece without any cause for concern.
For if there remains any cause, little or much, the knot will return according to its nature.
And if some small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen it, and press on that which seems to be an abscess, and cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then cut both lips of it and heal it with that which enters into it.
But if there is no pulsating vein on it, or not pulsating, then cut and cauterize the place where it was with three-forked cautery that is vitriol, and leave that open for two or three days until the wound closes and the ebullition of blood returns; and again return to excising what remains of the knot.
Capitol XLVI
Chapter XLVI
"Of those are the forms of intestines, and they are of three species: some are large, others medium-sized, and still others small."
"The large intestine is shaped like this:"
"The small intestine is shaped like this:"
"Let there be fingers of iron, almond-shaped, with rounded tips, to facilitate the insertion of the intestines into the openings."
"And these are the shapes of experiments, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berid."
"And they are of three species: some are large, others medium-sized, and still others few in number."
"The shape of the large experiment is that of a lion:"
"The shape of the medium-sized experiment is that of an eagle:"
"The shape of the few experiments is that of a lynx:"
"It is convenient that they be for those openings, outlets and fistulas and boils, since between these are some of the bones and other causes."
"And these are redondas, thick, like lions, such as large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of gold, or of silver, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are those made of gold."
"And these experiments are made of black feathers, which are arranged so that through them the fistulas are opened in whose concavity reflections are reflected, and they are reflected with their own light on those reflections."
"And they are of three species: some are long, others medium-sized, and still others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the strictness of its opening."
"The shape of the large lead experiment:"
"The shape of the medium-sized lead experiment:"
"The shape of the small lead experiment:"
"The shapes of the hooks are of many species, for some are simple, with only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium-sized."
"And there are also curved hooks, which are of three species:"
"Among those hooks with two curvatures, there are three species."
"And among those that have three curvatures, there are three species."
"And all these are necessary in their place."
"The shape of a small simple hook, its form is like this:"
"The shape of a large hook with two curvatures:" "The shape of a medium-sized hook with two curvatures:" "The shape of a small hook with two curvatures:"
"The shape of a large hook with three curvatures:"
"The shape of a medium-sized hook with three curvatures:"
"And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and tumors are cut and scraped, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small."
"The shape of a large scalpel:"
"The shape of the medium-sized scalpel:"
"The shape of a small scalpel:"
"The extremities of those with which sections are made are sharp and the others are not sharp, not pausadas in such a way that they may be used judiciously in the excision of nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, so that the illness may be cured and tranquility obtained through the healing that follows the scraping of tumors."
"And these are the shapes of forceps, which are of three species: large, medium-sized and small, as you can see."
"They are made of iron and resemble the shape of a rod with which alcohol is distilled."
"And they have one end punched with a spatula hidden inside and the other end open, so that you can easily insert them into or withdraw them from an area as desired."
"The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden among the ones mentioned earlier for the perforation of tumors and do not cause injury, are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small." "And these are the shapes of those:"
"The forms of syringes with which blood flow is absorbed, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized and small; their forms are as follows:"
"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and are subtle."
"And it is necessary that these species of syringes be large, medium-sized and small, so that with those you can absorb blood flow quickly in case of necessity, and also when there is no medical assistance at first."
"But do not use them to absorb blood in all parts of the body, only in fleshy areas, such as the armpits and groin, the arms and breasts, the abdomen and thighs, and similar moist fleshy areas."
"And sometimes these instruments are made into small ones similar to scissors of forceps according to this shape; with which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy or injury to a vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:"
"Chapter xlvii."
"Of the care of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women."
"Some men's breasts sometimes become swollen after sleeping, and as they swell, women's breasts also swell similarly."
"And upon that one who has this, it is necessary to make an incision on those breasts according to this shape, from line BG, and remove all the thickness, then fill the wound with a poultice of healing medicine, then sew up both lips of the wound, and heal it until it is healed."
"However, if the nipple leans towards the sides and is enlarged due to its size like in women, then it should be split into two parts from above with two incisions resembling a crescent moon shape, each contained within the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this shape of line BG and line G. And then remove the excess skin between both lips of the wound, drain the pus, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in the healing process until it is healed."
"And if you do not make the necessary incision due to the disturbance of the disease and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a poultice of boiled corrosive ointment and leave it until that which has been corroded breaks away from its thickness, then heal it until it is healed."
Chapter XLVIII
"Regarding the perforation of boils that come out on the testicles."
"These are boils that appear on the skin due to conditions such as scrofula, hard ones that contain pus which can be squeezed out."
"And among those that contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the fluid inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it for another day."
"And also make sure that the cotton is removed and treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"And if the boil is of the type called nodes or scrofula, then cut into it as we have described in the section on scrofula and apply a dressing."
"And if the boil has spread so much that it is purulent, then apply cautery as we have described earlier."
"Chapter XLIX."
"Regarding the cutting of boils that occur by force or through a vein."
"When the artery is broken and the vein above it is constricted, many times a boil occurs. The signs by which inflammation and boil are known to be from the artery or vein: for when a boil is from an artery, it is elongated in front of the chest; and when you press the boil with your fingers, you feel stridor (i.e., noise) in it."
"And that which is due to a vein appears round on the body's surface."
"And cutting into this boil is an error, especially in those located near the armpits, on the angles of the eyes and mouth, on the neck, and many other parts of the body. And if it is large, its treatment with iron should be avoided; and if it is on the extremities or the head, it should be avoided."
"But concerning that which is due to inflammation of the artery's orifice, it should be cut along its length; and appropriate incisions are made with forceps around the artery, exposing its sheaths."
"And in this case an appropriate needle is used to penetrate the other side; and with doubled thread, the artery should be ligated at two points, which causes blood flow to be restored from two arteries that are located on the temples."
"And accordingly, pierce the location between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all blood is expressed from it, and thus the boil will be resolved."
"And accordingly, administer treatment that generates pus within which the ligatures fall; and appropriately treat with convenient ointments so that it may be healed."
"And if it is a boil due to the section of a vein, then you should take hold of whatever possible part of the vein near the boil with your hand; and accordingly introduce the needle from below the location that you have held in your hand, and make it penetrate; and with doubled thread, extract that which is on the other side, and appropriately ligate the boil with good ligature according to what I have told you in the section about the grapevine, dividing it into two parts with two extremities of the thread."
"But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the doubled thread with that needle from below the boil near the initial incision of the needle, and tighten your threads in four locations."
"And accordingly, dry out the boil in its middle part until what is inside it has exited; then incise the surplus of the vein and leave whatever of it is tied."
"And accordingly, press on it with powder that you have moistened in wine and oil; and appropriately administer treatment with compresses and ointments until it is healed."
"Chapter on the boil which occurs due to a twist of nerves."
"Similarly as boils occur in arteries and veins, likewise boils occur in nerves when they are subjected to percussion or when there is excessive labor; for similar reasons."
"And most often it occurs in the locations of the elbows or knees, or in any location where joints are moved excessively."
"And it is a severe boil that resembles the color of other skin, and is in large areas where there are no openings; when it is pressed with violence, it causes pain like numbness."
"And it is not aggregated in the front of the body; rather, it is on the side of the vein, and it moves to all parts but does not move towards the front or back."
"Therefore, those that are in joints should not be bandaged with iron, for it would cause great contraction."
"But that which is on the head or forehead should be opened with a spatula." "But if it is a small boil, then squeeze it with your fingers and excise it with scissors."
"And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps, excise and remove it; then adjust the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals."
"Chapter LI."
"Chapter on the section of boil that occurs due to injury of the abdomen."
"Among these men, some have seen boils in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies that are called fungous due to their similarity with fungi; the root of which is subtle and the head is large. And sometimes the lips of those become inverted, both those that are small and those that are greatly enlarged."
"And I have seen one such boil in the belly of someone who had two parts resembling fungi; there was no difference between those parts, being small and white."
"And sometimes the lips of these were inverted and split open, and moisture ran from them at all times."
"So I incised those and removed from one of them eighteen ounces, and from the other six ounces."
"And the operation in incising them is that you should consider whether the pain is humid, and if the color of the boil is white, humid, with a subtle root; then open it with a wide spatula, and have cauteries ready before you because many times much blood is expelled during the sectioning. And if blood comes out, cauterize it."
"And if the pain is fearful and terrifying, beware of incising with iron. Rather, take fresh lead wire made from tin, and tie it around that boil in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days."
"And appropriately adjust the tightening of the lead wire. Therefore, do not stop tying on until it is excised and falls off by itself without any effort."
"But if the boil has a thick root, then there is some cause for fear and anxiety in incising it, especially those that are on the belly."
"But it is possible to incise most of it, and appropriately cauterize it so that it does not return."
"And appropriately treat it until the wound has healed."
"And beware that you do not presume to incise a boil that is of dark color, with little sensation, and carefully examined; for such is cancerous."
"And I come now with memory to what was said before about cancer."
"Chapter LI
"Chapter on the treatment of prominence of the navel."
"Prominence of the navel occurs due to many causes: either from fissures in the skin above the belly, or from tissue or bowel protruding through other ruptures; or from blood flowing from a vein or artery, as mentioned before; or from obstructed wind in it."
"But if it is due to a fissure in the skin and protrusion of tissue, then the boil will have a similar color to that of the skin; it will be painless and appear in various locations." "But if it is due to protrusion of bowel, then the location of that boil will be as we have described earlier, with great variation and diversity. And when you press it with your fingers, it disappears but quickly returns. And there will be much pain and difficulty with washing and effort."
"But if it is due to moisture, then it will be painless and not disappear when pressed by your hand. It will not become hard or enlarged."
"And if it is due to blood, then the boil will appear with these signs becoming dark in color."
"But if it is due to prolapsed flesh, then it will be a severe boil that is large and hard, depending on the quantity of tissue protruding."
"But if it is due to wind, then touching it will cause no pain."
"First, examine whether the navel's prominence is due to blood vessel or vein swelling, or windiness. If so, refrain from treating him, for in that case there is fear and dread, as taught in the chapter where it says 'abscesses by blood vessel and vein.'"
"If the navel's prominence is due to bowel or tissue, you should then have the patient hold their breath while standing upright and extended. Next, examine all around the umbilical area with your finger, then command them to bend forward between their thighs over their two knees; then circumscribe the umbilical area with a broad spatula where your finger has indicated. Then extend the swelling of the abscess upwards using forceps, and finally ligate it firmly but gently in a proper manner."
"Then cut through the middle of the extended abscess down to the ligament and insert your finger into that opening while seeking the bowel. If you find it and keep it firm with your fingers, then carefully extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
"And if you have found tissue instead of bowel, then grasp it with forceps, and cut away its excesses."
"But if it is a vein or artery that you encounter, then encircle it with a ligature and return to your operation. Take two needles, tie strong thread onto them, insert the needles into the previously made incision around the abscess in such a way as to form a cross, penetrate them; then pull the abscess in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the skin to heal by itself. Or else cut away the excess when it has healed over, and then care for it with water until it is completely healed."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to fat or moisture, then you should cut away the abscess as we have described and drain out any blood or moisture that you find there. Then treat it with water and ensure that the area is healed."
Chapter Liii
"On treating a carbuncle."
"We have already spoken, in the division on the type of carbuncle and how it is treated with medicines, that using iron to treat it should be avoided as it can cause ulceration. We have also mentioned that a carbuncle can occur due to improper care during treatment."
"And the ancients said that sometimes carbuncles can occur in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, such as those on the breasts or buttocks, and especially when they are small at the beginning."
"But when it is advanced and large, do not attempt to treat it yourself, for you will not be able to heal such an ulcer nor have I seen another case, nor has it been recorded."
"And the operation for treating it is when it is located as we have described, which is to first let the inflammation subside and purge with black hellebore several times, then incise it if there is a noticeable swelling."
"And then prepare the inflammation with a preparation suitable for the location of the operation. Then excise the base of the carbuncle using forceps that are suitable for it, and scrape away all the surrounding tissue with great care to ensure that there is no remaining cause of the infection." "And let the blood flow freely, do not remove it too hastily, express the area, and absorb all the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is at your disposal."
"But if you find it difficult to deal with the thick blood, then make an incision into a vein or artery nearby in order to reduce the flow of blood. Then cauterize that area until the bleeding stops, and treat it with the other methods until it is healed."
Chapter Liv
"On the treatment of dropsy."
"We have already described, in the division (of diseases), the species of dropsy due to water and their signs, and their treatment with medicines."
"And that which is cured with iron is only the species of ascites alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympany nor to the species of hydrops archi, for this is mortal."
"And when you have treated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and it does not improve, then consider whether the patient has already attained debility, or if there is another dropsy present, as in cases of coughing or abdominal distention and similar ones. Then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this."
"But if the disease is one of excess of natural heat, and there is no other disease present but dropsy alone, not infancy or old age, then the method of operation is as follows: you should elevate the patient between your thighs, and the assistant should press the abdomen with his hand, expressing water from it near the navel, and then take a sharp-pointed spatula in this manner:"
"It should be double-pointed and long, with a sharp extremity like a spatula; but nevertheless it should have some shortness little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowels, and thus harm him."
"And then consider if the dropsy is due to an obstruction of the bowels, for in that case you should make your incision at a distance from the navel by three fingerbreadths on the right side above the pubic hair."
"But if the dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingerbreadths."
"And if the cause of the dropsy is the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
"Make sure your section (operation) is on the side where you want to place the patient, so that excess fluids do not flow to that area."
"Then carefully pierce with the instrument all along the canal, and when you reach that section, raise your hand with the spoon between the canal and the spermatic cord, and remove that; if the amount is about the size of a nail or less."
"And then pierce the spermatic cord until you reach the desired location, which is where water flows in." "Then remove that and insert an instrument with the following shape:" "And it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or laton lion, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is cut obliquely like a pen feather."
"And at the upper end of it there is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, that moment it begins to suck on the instrument, hence it evacuates water in equal quantity at the same time; for if you evacuate more than necessary at that moment, it will quickly cause death by resolving its animal spirit, or approach death."
"But evacuate according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument, and according to what you understand about the conditions of the illness, the virtue of its pulse, and its quality."
"And then remove the instrument, and retain the water that is held by the spermatic cord which holds the hole through which you pierced it according to this manner."
"And then repeat the operation on another day if the illness tolerates it, and remove a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with fear that you should not leave too much water."
"But if you are afraid of the illness and leave too much water, then treat it with a grave sepulture in dry sand, and much sweat in baths, and expose it to sunlight for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed."
"And cauterize the stomach, and the mesentery near the extraction of the water, according to what I have described previously."
"Chapter 50."
"On the treatment of children born with non-perforated urinary orifices."
"Sometimes some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of the penis not pierced (or the hole is too narrow or not in its proper place)."
"Therefore, it is necessary to perform a perforation of the patient immediately after birth if they are born with a subtle defect according to this form."
"And then pause in the tract a thin leaden awl and attach it, and leave it there for three days or four."
"And when they want to urinate let them be moved away and pee; and then return that (the awl)."
"If you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls upon the place will not allow this to close."
"But that of whom the tract is removed should be medicated with leaden awl as we have said, for too many days until it is widened."
"But those in whom the tract is not in its place are called 'strangury', which causes that of those who are born and from whom it is removed, that one should be placed at the end of the head of the penis so that they cannot urinate downward, but rather raise the penis with their hand upward; and this is not due to generation, for then semen could not reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very harmful disease."
"And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient should be placed on his back, and then stretch the head of the penis with your left hand with violent traction, and incise the head of the penis at the opening of the urethra with a sharp spatula, like cutting a feather, but do not cut any part too much, for then the middle of the urethra will resemble the head of the penis and the tract will fall into its proper place."
"And beware in your operation for flux of blood, because many times this occurs; and pause with this that you cut the blood vessels, and cure the wound until it is healed."
"Chapter LVI"
"Chapter 56: About the whitening which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about roughness, blackness, adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis."
"Very often this whitening occurs in the penis, which is a prominence of flesh there."
"And among these one is malignant and another is not malignant."
"Not malignant: it is necessary that you suspend with a subtle hook and cut away that until all of it has been removed; and then pause upon it until it is slightly covered with Egyptian oil; and again, cure it with soft oil until it is healed."
"But if the whitening is malignant, of blackish color, then you should administer cautery properly to the incision and to the root of it."
"But if the whitening is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised head of the penis, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the whitening which is inside at the beginning until it has consolidated; and then you should cure that which is outside, for if you cure both together with the foreskin, it may be pinched."
"And also it happens in the genitals and foreskin blackness and roughness, then you should scrape away all that which has already been darkened and is about to rot or has already rotted; and then line it with this: mix honey with ground barley flour, powdered frankincense, and strained wormwood."
"And again cure it with the other cure until it is healed."
"But if there is a flux of blood, then apply cautery with the moon according to this form:"
"for cautery is in two positions at once: it is for flux of blood and for the wound when it is corrupted."
"And if the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the urine may flow through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that one for whom the foreskin is too tight, and circumcision is not required on it; and when adhesion occurs because of a wound or an abscess) you should excoriate with a blunt spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to separate those very carefully, then you should excoriate with a spatula slightly from the head of the penis and foreskin, for this reason: because the foreskin, when it is fine, can be lightly pierced by its own fineness."
"And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of fine linen, which has already been softened in warm water so that they will not adhere again."
"And then let it be cured with sternutatory wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter LVI."
"Of the purification of infants and of the cure for what happens to them at circumcision."
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other diseases: but since it is our operation and within our control, especially in children, we must assign the best operation and path to preserve health more easily.
Therefore it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in all of their books because they did not use it in their laws. However, since we have acquired this practice through experience, I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision with a knife and clamps; and they use lime plaster and nail scissors for the incision.
And I have already tested all these methods and did not find better circumcision with forceps, lime plaster that uses the nail scissors for incision. For many times it escapes the frenulum upwards, because the frenulum of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains below; and it is very easy to cause another incision and certain pain. And in circumcision which is done by the method of the Greeks and is done digitally, used by the barbers, the incision of the glans penis is not secure; for it often slips into the groove of it.
However, in the operation with a nail, you often cause injury and spoil your work. "And the child's spine is short by nature, and often seen in this manner, requiring no modification, indeed I have seen such."
"However, the modification that is done with forceps and ligaments with felt, has been proven to me by experience because the forceps are of proportional incision. Therefore, the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; thus when you press your hand proportionately on both sharp points, you cut in one direction according to a comparison at once. And it makes compression of the felt with a figure containing the spine of the whole part, without any error throughout."
"And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child lie on its back more if it is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything else but lay the felt on its spine only, and leave it like that for another day."
"And therefore you should gladden in every possible way that is within your power to receive his understanding." "And therefore you should make him stay among your closest ones, properly prepared, and not afraid at all. And hide the forceps in your hand or behind your head so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
"And therefore put your hand on the spine of the child and blow on the cord, and pull that out which has come out, that is, the head of the spine, and also clean it from whatever dirt has accumulated in it."
"The form of the forceps for cleaning is this:"
"Let the outer edges be not-toothed and cutting, and let the other be toothed, that there may not come out the branch of the key, and let the length of both points be thus as the length of two handles opened."
"But the mistake in cleaning is when you pull too hard and escape the inner cord entirely or broken from where it should be cut."
"Therefore, you must stretch that with your fingernail before the inflammation of the spot and incise it evenly."
"If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with wax and incise it."
"However, if three days have passed and the swelling from the aposteme has decreased, then leave it alone until the aposteme is completely cured. Remove that with ease, and cut it according to your preparation."
"And beware of the head of the penis, for it will not be affected by this treatment."
"Then treat it with that which solidifies the wound from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
"If it is cut properly and you follow the instructions above, there will be nothing more to do for it."
"And also treat it with that which we have mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter LVIII."
"On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder."
"Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to a blockage caused by a stone or congealed blood, or by a prolapse or stricture, and it is treated similarly to those conditions that we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division [of urology]."
"And if it is not dissolved despite what we have mentioned and the cause of the illness is very severe, then you should perform extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and polished like a reed quill, similar to a goose feather quill with subtlety equal to one and a half spans, at the end of which there should be a thin tube in its head."
"And the method of removing urine with this is as follows: Take a bent feather and attach it firmly to the end of the thread or cotton; insert the end of the feather into the hole of the syringe, and if there are any excess threads from the cotton, cut them with scissors. Then insert the thread into the tube with force and properly fill the syringe with warm water."
"And make the patient lie on their back, insert the syringe into the bladder and anoint it with olive oil mixed with wax."
"And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the penis; properly bend the penis upwards at the point of the navel; then press on the syringe strongly with that and push it in until it enters the bladder. Then center it so that the patient feels relieved from the cause being empty, but do not follow this order if there is any tortuousness present."
"And then slowly extend the feather with the thread bit by bit because urine clings to the thread."
"And then remove that and perform curettage of urine, using a syringe continuously until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relieved."
**Chapter 99.**
**On the quality of clystering the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.**
"When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood collects there and you wish to draw out water and medications from it, then use an instrument called a catheter, which is shaped as follows:"
"but its outer end is closed off, so it is sealed." "And in that there are three holes: two from one side, like this."
"At the beginning it is concave inside, which is called the bulb, and let it be according to the quantity of that which enters into it, without any addition; so that when any cause draws from those moistures, they may also draw with it, and when it is expelled, with that it may draw also, as a catheter does when pouring pitch on naval battles."
"So when you wish to expel moistures from the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the moisture and draw with it that which is expelled through those holes above, for the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the catheter."
"And properly insert the end of the catheter into the urethra as we have described in the previous chapter, and then expel the moisture with that which you expel, for that moisture will quickly go to the bladder, relieving the illness."
"The form of the thin catheter used to evacuate the bladder is as follows:"
"And let it be made of silver or lead, of which the tip ought to resemble a small feather, and from there on let it be hollow."
"And take a bladder from a dead animal and place in it the moisture which you wish to evacuate into the bladder, then tie it tightly between two strong threads with double knots, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra."
"Then stretch your hand over the bladder with moisture, straightening the descent within that patient so that that moisture has reached the bladder."
"If you do not have the bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle; and pierce that through its entire thickness; and then insert some felt strongly into those folds so that it is well-rolled in there; and then add water to that so that it is added as above mentioned, since you pause in that place that you want regarding the moistures and waters."
"And then you take that (i.e., the filled instrument) and place it like you did with the bladder, expressing moisture into your hand so that it reaches the bladder."
Chapter 60.
Of stone extraction
"We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and cure with medicine regarding the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their signs."
"And we have said about the stone where incision is performed using hand or cutting."
"And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which remains in the bladder."
"And we shall now relate this with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
"So it is said that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs are: the urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears cloudy; the pain afflicts the urethra, often prevents urination, and sometimes causes blood to appear at the end of the penis; and with this there is great straining of the anus."
"And it would be easier to heal children suffering from this condition if they have reached fourteen years of age, but difficult cure in old people." "But with young ones it is midway between the two."
"And in that case where the stone is large and cure more difficult, but if it is small, it is favorable for that condition."
"So when we come to the treatment of this condition, at the beginning it is necessary to relieve the pain with a catheter which extracts all the sediment that is in its channels; for sometimes this channel prevents the extraction of the stone during investigation."
"And then let the patient be seized by his feet and suspended head downwards, so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder or fall out."
"And then let that person be placed between two well-prepared assistants, and let their most useful things be at hand, so that the bladder may be completely emptied by inclining it towards its parts."
"And then seek that out and extract all of it."
"So if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut thereupon with incision."
"And if you cannot reach it all with your touch, then it is necessary to anoint the index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if he is a grown-up, and insert that into his anus." "And seek out the stone which remains there by your finger." "And gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder."
"And then press upon it with your finger and expel it through the opening made without injury to the parts outside."
"And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand he should spread the labia majora apart, and with his other hand he should retract the cord which is behind them, towards the part where the incision is made."
"And then introduce a spatula of this form:" "And then incise with it between the anus and the labia majora, not in the middle part, but towards the left side; let the incision be over the stone and your finger be inside the anus; let the incision be transverse so that it is wide outside and narrow within according to the quantity of the stone which can be extracted therewith, nor more, for otherwise you will compress your finger with the stone during the operation and cause difficulty."
"And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, for which their extraction is difficult on account of this."
"And of those stones, the one resembling a pine nut is round and its extraction is easy."
"So if it has angles or edges, adapt the forceps to the fissure."
"And if it is not easily extracted, then you must press upon it gently but firmly with the forceps, or use a suitable instrument resembling a chisel to press upon the stone, taking care not to lose sight of it; or else introduce a delicate curved instrument into it."
"But if you cannot reach it, then widen the tract a little and if you see blood flow, cut through it strongly with spirit of nitre."
"But if there are several stones, then at the beginning press your hand on the mouth of the bladder and make an incision upon it; then press a little around that place; and do likewise if there are more than two grains."
"And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise it with a large opening, for one of two causes occurs in the patient: either retention or continued distillation of urine, which makes that place not completely solid."
"But administer evacuation of the stone from within after it has been extracted, or press upon its fracture with forceps so as to extract it in pieces."
"So when you have completed your operation, then fill the cavity with powder of aloes and dragon's blood, and press upon it strongly." "And lay upon that a linen cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in olive oil mixed with water, so that a cauterizing aposteme may be formed."
"And then let the patient lie on his back and do not remove the ligature until the third day."
"And when that has been untied, wash the place with water and much oil, and then cure it with a fine ointment and with diabazolicon until it is healed."
"But if an aposteme occurs in the cavity which is hard and corrosive, and similar to that which would be produced by frozen blood being in the bladder, for which urination is forbidden (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then introduce your finger into the cavity and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke inflammation of the bladder and its corruption."
"And then wash the cavity with sour wine, water, and salt, and apply remedies opposed to all kinds of inflammation, according as is convenient for the cure until it is healed."
"And it is necessary during all the time of the cure that you keep both labia majora separated and apply the medicines which are placed upon the part."
"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the glans penis and adheres to it, so that its extraction by incision is forbidden, then cure it with what I have recommended before you come to an incision, for many cases seen through this cure are accused of incision; and now I explain this to you, and it is that you take a pointed probe made of iron, of which this is the form:"
"of triangular shape, pointed, set in wood."
"And then take a feather and tie it around the glans penis behind the stone so that it may not return to the bladder."
"And then introduce the iron into the glans penis, perforating easily until the probe reaches that stone." "Revolve the borer with your hand in that little stone, bit by bit, and you shall penetrate its perforation so that urine may be released."
"And then press your hand on what is broken of the stone of the departed from the urethra, because that is crushed and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
"But if this cure does not suit you for any reason that prevents it, then insert a splint below the stone and another one above it." "And then strike the stone in that urethra between two ligatures." "And then remove it." "And then untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood, which is formed in the wound."
"And it is not necessary to use a splint below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other splint above for when it is untied near the exit of the stone, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound."
"And for that reason, it is necessary when you remove the splint above to elevate the cord towards the parts above, or else it will return and cover the wound as we have said."
"Chapter LXI"
"Of removing stones from women."
"Stones are rarely formed in women."
If a stone appears in any of those places, then its cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
One of them is when the woman strongly desires sex.
And the second one is if you cannot find a good woman who knows how to tell whether or not she has been with another man when she is a virgin, or if she is married.
The third one is if you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation of giving birth by cesarean section.
And the fourth one is that the location of the incision for a stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, so it requires careful sectioning, and there is danger involved.
But if necessity requires you to do this, then you should take a skilled midwife who has little experience.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a clever and subtle physician, or present yourself to an experienced female midwife who is skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
So have that one presented, and command her to do everything that you will order her to do regarding the examination at the beginning; which is why she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the stone.
Then if she finds it, have her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make the incision on that location.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and examine for the stone, since she will place her left hand on the bladder, and press on it with good pressure.
Then if she finds it, then gradually move the edge of the scalpel from the opening of the bladder to the sides with great care and skill until you reach the root of the matter.
And then make the incision on that location of the opening of the vagina, wherever it may be stopped and where the stone is found there, and her finger should not be removed from the stone until she has removed it.
And let the section be small at the beginning; and then insert the forceps into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the section according to the quantity which she knows that the stone will be taken out of that.
And know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and have no branches.
So you should know how many kinds there are by what you indicate about what you want to say.
And if you see flow of blood, then adjust the location with vinegar-soaked lint and let it sit for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
And have ready with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them during your operation.
And if you see flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been incised, then place powder on the location and compress it with lint and a tight bandage, and do not repeat this; leave the stone alone and do not remove it, for it will cause great harm to the patient. And then dress the wound.
So when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after a few days and the location has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Chapter LXII
Of Incision for Inguinal Hernia
Inguinal hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane which lies outside the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a processus vaginalis.
And sometimes it is in the proper parietal wall which nature has prepared for the reception of the testicle, but it is already another testicle; and it is the spermatic cord between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is nothing but fat.
The cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the testicles, so that through them this matter escapes and sometimes it happens due to a violent blow on the testicles.
This moisture has many colors, for its color is declining to yellow or sanguineous red, or brown, or it is blackish-white, or clear watery-white, and this is what is most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is located are these: for if it is in the white membrane that we have mentioned, then the swelling will be round and slightly elongated like a figure of an egg, and the testicle appears because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper parietal wall, then the swelling will be round with a depression of the testicle and because of this one might estimate that it is another testicle.
And if the moisture is between the spermatic cord and the white membrane, then the contents will be felt separately.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then press on the swelling with an instrument whose shape is appropriate for this purpose. And according to what comes out in the trace of the instrument, judge what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be flaccid if possible, and empty his body.
And then let him lie on his back slightly higher than his head and put many cloths under him.
And then sit on the left side of him and command the minister to be at his right side. Let him extend his arm two palms wide at the spermatic cord and the opening of the abdominal wall.
And then take a broad-bladed knife and incise the spermatic cord in the middle as far as possible towards the penis.
And let the incision be made according to the rule with equal distance from the line that should divide the skin of the testicles until it reaches the white membrane containing.
And strip that, observe it, and guard yourself for this so that you do not incise it. And your stripping with which you strip it should be done gently so that it is suspended with the testicle more finely and carefully explore it according to its quantity as much as possible.
And then perforate the water-filled membrane with a broad perforation, and remove all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the membrane at its sides. Do not touch the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and incise the membrane in that manner which is possible for you. Incise that completely or in pieces and especially its finer sides, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the testicle appears outside its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it inside that and then join together the two lips of the spermatic cord with suturing. And then dress it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate its vessels which are on top of the suspender and remove it. And then dress it with what we have said.
But if water accumulates in two places at the same time, know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other one equally. And if it appears to be an operation, then perform it.
"And then you shall clean the blood, and insert into the sections wool immersed in oil or rosemary-infused oil; and place over another wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both knees and the navel of the belly; and place over folded cloths and powders, and bind those over with linen, which is prepared thus:"
"And then take two cloths and fill them with wool curled in this manner; and make the ends of them with which they are tied with cotton or wet wool, and attach them with a strap to the waistband of the breeches, and one end should take hold of the buttocks between the two, and the second end should take hold at the opening of the panties, and two other ends over both sides of the thighs and two other ends over the ankles, and all the strapping should be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with iron; and you should take a sharp cautery knife and with it burn the ring of the groin, igniting it in such a way that the white skin containing the water appears, and then you shall take cautery according to this manner:" "And it is shaped like the Greek letter gamma."
"And then pierce with that cautery through that skin, and burn until all the fluid has been expelled."
"And then stretch the skin with forceps and remove it with forceps and burn it with a sharp cautery that has been ignited; and cut into it as much as you can without touching the wound with fire."
"And know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding than an incision."
"But if you encounter any difficulty with aposteme or bleeding during the time of incision or cautery, or excessive bleeding, then you should take care to treat that difficulty according to what is appropriate for it, as has been said."
"But if the patient is afraid and does not endure a second operation because of its horror, then you should perform perforation according to what has been recommended for that; and this is when you are certain, by means of what has been said about symptoms, that that hernia is hydrocele."
"Then you should make the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the aposteme at its lowest part with a wide spatula, and continue the puncture according to the length of the body."
"And let the opening be wide enough that all the water may run out."
"And then press on the location closed and tie it up and leave it alone, so that the remaining water may drain out." "And then treat it until the wound is healed."
"But if there is difficulty in the escape of water at that time, then puncture it again: and this happens only because the white fat around the wound causes obstruction and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, you should insert into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water from hydroceles is extracted, the form of which is described elsewhere; or adjust a small tube in the opening of the wound."
"And know that the water returns and becomes accumulated after about six months or thereabouts. And when it is accumulated, then it should be punctured again in the same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days."
"Chapter LXIII."
"Of incision into a fatty hernia and its treatment."
"Know that in the incision into this hernia, great danger is feared for the patient; therefore, it is better to dismiss it and save him by that means."
"And I am thus reminding you of the operation on this type of hernia and the varieties of apostemes."
"Therefore, it is said that apostemes are born in the bodies of those whose knees are composed and this occurs for many causes: either by acute, bitter superfluity which has been discharged into the joints or by contusion."
"The color of the aposteme follows the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain. It is a severe aposteme."
"A hardened aposteme is called 'lapified', its color is dark, and it is insensitive to touch."
"Sometimes this occurs due to the obstruction of arteries and veins, or due to inflammation of those same vessels as soon as they are perceived to be remembered, or due to inflammation of veins."
"But that which occurs by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when you press it with your fingers, without needing to touch it."
"But that which occurs by inflammation of a vein does not disperse due to compression with the fingers."
"It is possible that on this type of aposteme an incision may be made and on other flesh as well. You should incise the sheath of the tendons and approach the bone at its joints, then extract the white matter and free the suspenders of the vessels, tie them off, and cut away those suspenders which you have freed from all connection with the joint."
"Therefore, if the bone is already consolidated within those tissues, then it is necessary to extract the bone and incise that region."
"And if there is adhesion within the bone due to some cause of the matter, or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and make a round incision."
"But if there is nativity of flesh in the place where that adhesion is located which is behind it, then it is necessary to incise all that is of it, and extract the bone as we have said."
"Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and wine, and afterwards treat it with another cure until it is healed."
Chapter LXIV
On the treatment of hernias that are from below.
"Below is an aposteme wrapped by some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testicles. It is difficult to make movements and walk about due to this illness."
"And in treating this illness, it is done by fear that which preceded its memory."
"However, we must say operation on it according to what was first said."
"And I say that you should seize the illness on an elevated cushion; and then strip the suspenders of the testicles at their attachments; and then take hold of the sheath of the tendons with your fingers on those vessels which are close to the groin, and have another assistant who you extend them with great tension."
"And then incise with a sharp, broad spathion through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed."
"And then strip away all attachments just as we have said to you regarding extraction of hernias which are in the temples."
"And then place a needle with double thread in it into that first place where you made the incision, and tie it there once; and tie it again in the last of those places." "And then incise them in the middle place through a straight section along the length of the body, and extract what has been accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors."
"And then treat the wound with treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated because those vessels which you did not tie off one or both tendons will fall."
"But if you make a hernia on all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that they are tied off with the vessels because those testicles will be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels. And they should be cauterized so that there is no injury from them."
Chapter LXV.
"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation in the diaphragm that extends over the abdomen on both sides of the naval, allowing some loops of intestine from that rupture to descend into it."
"And this rupture is either of the diaphragm itself or of its opening; and such cases occur for many reasons: either from a blow, fall, coughing, sneezing, or from some heavy lifting or strain."
"And the sign of this, when it is due to an enlargement of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly; and it appears as a swelling within the abdomen because the diaphragm compresses the bowel."
"And the sign of it is when it is due to a separation of the diaphragm because at the beginning there occurs sudden violent pain; and it appears as a swelling different from that near the groin on the right side, which is due to the escape of the bowel, with its contents forced out through the opening in the diaphragm."
"And sometimes a portion of the mesentery or fatty tissue adheres to the intestines and is pulled along when they protrude through the opening, and this type of hernia is called an 'incarcerated' hernia."
"And sometimes it is accompanied by windiness; other times it runs in the bowel furrow, becomes retained there, and this causes great danger to the patient. Sometimes it also causes very severe pain, especially when it is pressed."
"And in the cure of these cases by means of iron, caution must be exercised lest an exacerbation occur at that time."
"And the manner of operating upon this is that you order the patient to try and reduce the bowel with his own hand within the cavity if it will obey its return; and then quickly place your hands on either side of his costal arch and elevate his chest."
"And then draw up the groin where the inguinal canal lies, and incise the entire inguinal canal lengthwise; and then insert two forceps into the lips of the incision according to what you may need to open it with them."
"And if, according to your judgment, the opening should be sufficient that the bowel may slip out."
"And then carefully dissect away those tissues which lie near the inguinal canal on either side until the white, firm aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle is exposed at each end."
"Then you insert your finger into that which lies the testicle, which is between the white aponeurosis, which is near the bowel loop, and between the second aponeurosis, and separate any adhesion which may be present behind the bowel."
"And then draw up the inguinal canal with your hand on either side, and at the same time extend the white aponeurosis upwards with your left hand, elevate the bowel with the aponeurosis to the level of the incision; and order the assistant to hold the bowel extended above while you dissolve any adhesion that may be present behind with saline solution."
"And then carefully examine if there is no cause for the bowel being entrapped within the firm white aponeurosis." "But if you find any cause for it, then gently replace that into the abdomen on that side."
"And then make an incision in that part near the inguinal canal through which blood and serum may flow as we have previously recommended."
"And then apply lanolin soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white aponeurosis which we have mentioned near the opening of the blood vessels, because many times this occurs); and leave the ligature so that it may fall by itself."
"But if the wound is delayed in healing, then boiled water should be applied to it, and place it on that so that it may fall as we have said."
"And then treat the wound with other methods of treating wounds until it is healed."
Chapter LXVI
**On Ventous Hernia.**
In this hernia, there has been nothing burned during its cure by iron.
And the first ones said that it is done thus as we have recounted in the hernia which is with wine; its method is that you lie the vessels near the section over that with facility of it; and approach dry in the midst place around the aposteme with water that works that, until the vessels fall.
And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Here's a guess:
"Regarding the injury inflicted upon the angels."
"And sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines, as we have said before, and it should be examined."
"Don't tell the riders about any causes of colic in horses; if you do, it is little; and it returns at all times."
"If the time is prolonged by this [the colic], an appropriate incision must be made into the colon where the intestine enters it; and this occurs because of the dilation of the colon which is in the groin area as we have said, the cause being that the colon has extended, and nearby areas become softened and the location becomes inflamed and swollen."
"And its treatment is by cautery, as described above."
"And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this manner: the sick person lies on their back between two blankets, and then the location of the swollen and inflamed carbuncles is dried by a lateral section made according to their size."
"And then strengthen the white colon that is below the backbone so that it is uncovered."
And then take the wand and place it on the prominent part of the hip, and press it firmly against the front of the abdomen.
And then choose two prominent points on the end of the wand placed over the hip bone and adjust them close to each other with one next to the other.
And then extract the end of the wand, ensuring that none of the intestines remain inside the inguinal canal, neither stretched out nor otherwise distorted, as you should know from your knowledge of intestinal hernia treatment.
And then cure it with the treatment for hernias, and after opening the skin, cleanse it and restore the hernia until it is consolidated; because the inguinal canal contracts and does not adjust to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better at this location, as it is closer to safety.
Capitolum lxviii.
On the Softening of the Spermatic Cord
Many times, the spermatic cord in some men is softened due to this fact that the tissues between it are softened, and it is noticeable to observe it.
Therefore, it is necessary for someone who is treated for this to make the patient lie down according to his condition, and cut all of the softened spermatic cord over the natural one; then approximate the lips with a suture.
And if you wish, at the beginning cut off the excess of the softened spermatic cord with three or four stitches and firmly suture it.
And then incise between the sutures; and then treat with treatment for other hernias until it is healed, and the testicles fall back into place.
Capitolum lxix.
On Castration
Know that castration is condemned in our law, but for the sake of learning I remember it here in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two methods, one of which is so that it may be within the knowledge of the physician when he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to treat it if it occurs; and the other method is because we often have need of castration of other beasts for our purposes, such as with many horses, and oxen, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with an incision.
"When injury occurs from a fall, the procedure is to first plunge the beast into boiling water until its joints are softened and then let them hang." "And then take those with your hand carefully, so they do not slip away from the touch."
"When castration is done through incision and section, you should hold the beast and press its testicular cord with your left hand."
"And then ligate the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each side between two testicles."
"Then cut those that you want to remove." "And do not leave any of the skin around it [the testicle], but peel off the skin carefully which is on top of the vessels."
"And this method of castration is better when done by crushing, because strong crushing leaves no trace of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
"And then treat the wound until it heals."
Chapter LXX.
"On Hermaphrodism."
"Hermaphrodism in males occurs in two ways: one is when it appears as something like a sheath in the space between the testicular cord, and that which is between two testicles resembles a female vulva with skin around its opening."
"And sometimes urine comes out of that which is on the cord of the testicles."
"But in females, it is one species: namely that the vulva of the female over the pubis appears like two male testicles, somewhat resembling the opening of the foreskin as with the male penis and two testicles."
"And its treatment is of three kinds: two in males and one kind in females." "And it is necessary to cut away that flesh attached so that the emission of that which escapes may be stopped, and then treat it with the cure for other wounds."
"And in the second kind in males where urine flows from the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation in it."
Chapter XXI.
"On Lentigo and Raised Flesh Caused by Women."
"Freckles are naturally attached and appear in the skin of those who have been rubbed, and are made worse by carelessness; some women have them greatly increased so that they spread like those in men, even to copulation."
"Then you should remove the excess of freckles with your hand or with an ointment and scrape them off."
"And do not end in incision, especially on the forehead, lest there be a flow of blood."
"And then treat it with the cure for wounds until it is healed."
"But raised flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills that space, and it often appears at the opening of the foreskin like a tail (and for this reason some people first called it "tail sickness"); therefore we should scrape it away just as we do with freckles, and treat it until it is healed."
Chapter LXXII.
"On the Cure of Herpes Zoster."
"Herpes zoster is when the vulva of the female is not pierced, or has a small opening." "And it is either natural or accidental."
"Accidental ones are due to previous illness, and they are made up of flesh that has grown too much, or from skin tags, or from thick or thin membranes."
"And they are found either on the forehead of the mother, or on her ribs, or on her belly above or below, and they prevent copulation and pregnancy and childbirth, and often prevent menstruation."
"And its recognition is made by the careful examination of the vulva, if the opening is obvious; but if it is not obvious, you should examine it with your fingers or with a speculum."
"But if the opening is due to a thin membrane, and it is between the two labia, then cut it and tear it apart."
"And if it appears over both of the labia majora, then put your fingers on both sides of them as shown above."
"And the woman should be on her back with her thighs spread apart, and then spread both labia with force so that this thin membrane is broken and the opening is made wider."
"And then take wool dipped in oil and place it on that spot, and leave it there for a day so that the wound does not become stuck together."
"But if the membrane is thick and coarse, then you should cut it with a broad blade or with myrtle leaves."
"But if the opening is due to flesh that has grown too much, then suspend it with an ointment and scrape it away."
"And use the medicines that stop bleeding without being bitten, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with album graecum."
"And then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing too quickly."
"And keep it like that for several days and apply hot water compresses."
"And then treat it with the other cure for consolidation until it is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that other fleshes are born from the mother's birth canal, and then you should cut them according to this method." "But if it is due to a hard abscess, then do not use iron in any way on the hard abscess that is in the mother's birth canal."
Chapter LXXIII.
"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tailbone pain, and redness that occurs in the area around women's genitals."
"Hemorrhoids are caused by many veins that continuously receive too much blood, and when they become old and stretched out, they create pain."
"I have already mentioned the types of hemorrhoids and their characteristics earlier, and I will now say which ones require treatment and which ones do not."
"Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are in the front of the anus but do not protrude and cannot be felt do not require treatment with iron."
"However, those that are at the opening of the anus and can be felt are the ones that need to be treated."
"It is necessary that you insert the woman's finger into her anus and gently extend it with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those with scissors."
"And gently sprinkle powder made from the flowers of the oak tree or similar on those wounds to stop the bleeding."
"And then have her sit quietly for an hour, and afterwards apply hot water compresses."
"And if the bleeding persists, then make her drink a decoction of sumac, oak bark, pomegranate rind, and similar."
"And also take barley flour mixed with honey, vinegar, and warm water and make a poultice to apply on the area."
"And if the bleeding is stopped, that's good. But if not, then attach two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the breasts."
"And also take wool and soak it in juice of coriander or juice of rue or juice of wall germander with white wine, then apply it to the area and cover it with a warm cloth until healed."
"And heal it until it is healed."
Chapter LXXIV
About accidental perforation of the bladder during childbirth.
Many kinds of apostumes can happen accidentally in childbirth, such as hard tumors and stone-like apostumes and ulcers and adhesions and hernias and fistulas and hemorrhages and tears and other apostumes. "And I have already spoken about these illnesses and their types and symptoms and treatments in the division."
"But I must explain in this treatise how to cauterize an apostume that appears in the bladder when it is of those that heal, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron."
"Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the apostume at its beginning is acute with percussion and chills and fever, and if it tends to swell and if pressure on it causes discomfort, then do not cut into it, and treat it with something that promotes maturation until the sharpness of the accident ceases."
"But then you should make the woman lie on her back on a pillow that has two pillows; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet so they are higher than her hips, and let her thighs be spread apart, and pause her arms by her sides, and tie each one with a suitable ligature."
"And then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the bladder is widened, the shape of which will be described in the relevant cases."
"And when you want to administer this instrument, you should stand at the entrance of the woman's vagina and make sure that only the tip of the instrument enters the bladder and not more than what is necessary for the illness." "But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the bladder, then you should place pledgets on the tissue around the opening of the bladder to prevent any instrument from entering it."
"And you should place the tip of a probe on the left side above and make sure that the person administering the instrument holds it and rotates the tip until the opening of the bladder is widened."
"And when the excretion appears and it is touched with the hand and it is clear and thin, then you should dry it with a linen cloth using the tip of the spatula."
"And when the healing is evacuated, then you should place in the wound a wick soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency and place it at the section of the opening of the bladder."
"And then cover the bladder and put clean wool moistened with water in which mallows have been boiled on top."
"And after two days, it should be dressed again with an ointment that is suitable for promoting maturation until it is healed."
"And sometimes the bladder and the wound are washed in such a way that they are christened with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which red rose leaves or long-stalked aristolochia have been boiled, and then the ointment is reapplied."
"If the wound becomes inflamed inside the bladder, then you should be prohibited from cauterizing it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have said in the division."
"Chapter 75"
"To teach midwives how to treat twisted births that are not in a natural position."
"It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the signs of a natural birth so that when she sees the woman pushing at the entrance and desiring to smell the air, and upon that she is relieved by what is above her from the birth, and hastens the exit of the child, then she knows that this birth is in a natural position, and the second one comes out on its back with its face down or suspended or hanging by the umbilical cord."
"So when you see these signs, then the belly of the child should be compressed so that the embryo comes out gently when it is on its back, and then the second one comes out on its back with its face down or suspended or hanging by the umbilical cord, and it should be cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing."
"But any other position of this birth is unnatural and undesirable because when the child comes out on its feet with its body coming out in front of its head with its feet facing downward, or one hand or a foot comes out first, or it comes out head down with one arm, or its abdomen comes out first, then it turns its face upwards, and these are the figures of an unnatural birth."
"Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those cases and to guard against errors and deception."
"And here I will show all of these figures and what position is indicated by each one and how it should be corrected."
"When the head comes out first in a natural way and it is stuck against the woman and its exit becomes difficult, and she sees her strength waning, then you should have someone support her or hold her, and evaporate her breath with ground fenugreek and warm oils."
"And then the midwife should insert a little spatula between her thighs and use it to bring out the second one or dry it with her nail until what is inside of it has been dried." "And press on the woman's belly until the child comes out."
"But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with a poultice of egg white and fenugreek with honey."
"Then order him to squeeze his chest and make him sneeze with caution; and hold his mouth and nose for an hour, because the breath will soon be forgotten."
"If both of the patient's hands are forgotten at the beginning [of the operation], then you should gradually reduce them with ease little by little." "But if the patient does not obey during the operation, then place a woman on top of him and hold down his legs tightly, and carefully tilt the bed towards the ground so that the woman may not fall due to the shaking."
"And if the hands are not returned quickly and the patient dies, then cut them open and remove the remains of the fetus or tie the body to his hand with cloth and pull it out gently, because it will soon be forgotten."
"When the fetus is over its own weight, then you should push it upwards gently, and carefully turn the fetus upside down, and wrap it in a cloth, and gradually pull one of its legs out."
"But when it is extracted inside the thighs, then you should tell him to cough and make him sneeze with caution, because if God wills, he may soon forget."
"And if it is not forgotten with what we have mentioned, then you should gradually return the fetus inside until it falls down according to its natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with a gentle extraction."
"And if it is prohibited with all that we have mentioned, then take some powdered aloe and dissolved gum, grind them well in a mortar, and line the woman's womb with it using a brush, starting from her lower belly." "And also make her drink a decoction of black cumin, until she obtains relief from her hypochondria."
"And when the openings of it are softened, then make him inhalation of myrtle steam and cover him with blankets." "And when he has received the steam inhalation for an hour, then make him lie on a bolster and make him sneeze, and extract the mouth of it gently, lift it up and press the lower opening of his belly gently with your hand, because the fetus will soon be forgotten."
The lateral extraction of the baby while keeping one of your hands in place. If the head does not reduce easily with your hand, then raise the woman's buttocks and help that part come out.
If it still cannot come out, then have her lie down on the bed, strike the baby's buttocks forcefully with your fist, and then administer warm liquids or remedies made from mucilaginous plants.
If the child has been born, then have the mother lie down on her back, and carefully examine the reduction of the hand. Then wrap the baby according to its natural shape, make the woman sneeze, and tell her to push until it is completely out.
Extraction of the baby with both hands by grasping the shoulders and turning them towards the mother's back. The midwife should hold the baby's head with one hand and gently turn it little by little, helping it to come out more easily.
When the head is out and as much of the baby's body has been born as possible, then pause briefly to apply the oil and mucilage mixture that we have recommended.
Then command her to push gently little by little. When you have done this, then have her lie down on one hip and tell her to lean over towards the right side, and command her to bear down; make her sneeze conditionally. Preparation for the exit of the fetus onto its side.
If you find that the mother is horrified by this method, then consider another method, and then carefully insert your nail into the second opening to remove any excess moisture.
If the baby is suspended by its face and neck, then insert your finger into the amniotic sac to release it and prevent suffocation.
Then gently push the baby out through the birth canal as necessary, pausing when it is appropriate to do so. Command the woman to bear down several times, and with God's help, the baby will be born easily.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that many twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and unusual. There are several causes for this, but it is not something that occurs frequently in life.
If there are multiple fetuses or twins joined together by their membranes, then separate them carefully. Each one has its own umbilical cord and amniotic sac. Sometimes they can be born naturally like any other baby, but sometimes they may need assistance in being born, as we have discussed.
If some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about unnatural positions, then care for them as we have discussed.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skillfulness, and with patience, and acts according to her knowledge as prepared by God for bringing about health.
Memorandum: What forms in the womb from embryos and aborts
Sometimes there are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten fetuses. It has been verified that a woman aborted six at once, and another bore ten all at once. The cause of this was due to measurement by learned physicians.
And it is important that the midwife knows how to deal with this situation well, and therefore she should pause if necessary according to what is appropriate.
Chapter 76
Of delivering a dead baby
When you are caring for a dead baby as we have discussed in the division on treatment and it has not yet been born, and you wish to use an operation with your hand, then you should consider whether the woman is of good health and does not have any of the conditions that could cause harm.
Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her left side with her head lowered and her hips elevated.
And the assistant should hold the woman from both sides or lie next to her on the bed, so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the baby.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the womb with olive oil mixed with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek seeds.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and gently insert it into the womb. Then she should search for where the fingers can grasp the baby's ankles
The suitable places to grasp the baby are: therefore, consider if the baby is positioned head down. If so, grasp its heels or neck or mouth or palate or beard or wishbone or near the ribs or hypochondria.
But if the baby is positioned feet down, then grasp it by the penis or the middle of its back
It is necessary to grasp the baby with your right hand and pause its curvature in that spot between your left fingers. Then gently insert your left hand and place your fingers on one of those locations we have mentioned until you reach the baby's body.
Then pause and grasp with another finger or the third if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not just pulling along its natural curvature.
It should be done gently in every delivery, so that the baby's emergence is eased just as it happens when removing a tooth.
And it is important that the extraction be done gently between them. If any part of the baby becomes stuck, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and twist those parts that are stuck
Therefore, if the delivery of the baby is difficult, then change your grasp to another place that may be easier. Do this until the entire baby has been delivered.
But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce that by its curvature, then a cloth should be wrapped around it. Then extract that until everything has been delivered, and cut it either at the junction of the fingers or at the joint.
And do the same with the other hand and both feet
But if the baby's head is large or its curvature becomes injured during delivery, or there is water in the fontanelle, then insert a pair of forceps between the fingers and tear the skin to facilitate extraction of the fluid or use an instrument called "alundat" whose shape will be shown with the other instruments in the next chapter.
Similarly, if the baby has a large head by nature, then cut it with scissors or use an "alundat" as mentioned earlier to facilitate extraction of the bones using forceps
If the head has exited and is compressed beneath the collarbone, then it should be cut so that the humidity in the chest may escape.
If it is not complicated or difficult, without making any incisions, then you should cut the head as soon as you can.
If the patient's abdomen is inflamed or they are suffering from dropsy, then it is necessary for you to pierce there so that the fluid may flow out.
But if the fetus is lying on its back, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mouth of the womb will be easy.
But if it is compressed beneath the abdomen and the chest, then you should remove it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and chest so that water may flow out of them.
But if the other limbs are out and the head is turned back, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is covered, then insert your hand into the uterus, encircle the head with it, pull it down towards the mouth of the womb, and then insert a hook or two hooks and pull it down with them.
And if the mouth of the womb is obstructed by an ulcerous inflammation that has occurred in it, then you should not be careless about this. In such cases, it may be necessary to administer an evacuation for excess fatty humidities. And apply poultices; and follow the patient with moistening and softening waters.
And if the fetus is lying on its side, then if it is possible, turn it: and administer what has been said for a live fetus.
And if that is not possible, then cut through the ribs and extract it.
You should not leave any cause inside the secondine.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what has been said about the cure for ulcerous inflammations that occur in the womb.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
"I have seen a woman whose belly was killed dead, and shortly afterwards she became pregnant again, but the child died as well." "An abscess happened to him in his belly quite some time ago; it swelled up there where the wound opened, and then he began to suffer."
"And I was called to care for him and treated him for a long time, but his illness did not improve."
I place upon him certain poultices with great attraction, and I remove from him one bone, and afterward it passes some days, and I remove another bone; but I was greatly amazed, because there are no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were of the dead man's bones.
Therefore I treated the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman who was in her best condition, and she lived thus for a long time, running from him with only one small arm.
And I did not think it was strange, for in this there is science and help for what the skilled physician effects with his hand to administer cure.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of vessel with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of the speculum in which the books are bound, in which binding there are two vessels at both ends of two feet. Moreover this vessel must be more subtle in narrowing, and it should be made of brass or ebony or boxwood.
"The width of each stake is two fingers and the margin between each is one finger; its length is one and a half palms. In the middle of these two stakes are two adjustments of this meter stake which are already fixed, with a length of about one palm and a bit more, and each has a width of two fingers or slightly more."
"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the main stake so that it is open with them when you turn the two prescribed virtues."
"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
"Let it be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps." "But at the end of those two adjustments there are thus holes, and their length is one palm each with a width of two fingers."
"And when you want to open the mouth with them, then place the female on top of the lieit so that what is between its legs hangs down, opening it there." "And then open your hand with the instrument thus, as you do with forceps when grasping something according to the amount of pressure you want on the opening of the mouth of the womb until it reaches what you want."
"The form of virtue that they called it in ancient times:"
"The form of 'impellent' with which the fetus is pushed out:"
"The form of 'amisidat' with which the large head is contained."
"And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end thus, as you see, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form thus, with teeth like the teeth of a comb with which it cuts and contains." "The form of 'amesidat' little:"
"Form of a hook having a spine:"
"Form of a hook having two spines:"
"Form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
"The form of two spatulas latched together:"
"Although those instruments are exercised, and the more species of them there are and the better prepared by the artisans, the easier it is for their operation and the more skilled you will be with their quantity."
"And do not disdain those instruments, whatever they may be, for the need of them is inexcusable."
"Regarding the extraction of the placenta."
"When the placenta is retained at childbirth, then you must order the midwife to hold her breath, and make that woman sneeze with condition, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this means it comes out, well."
"And if not, then you take some oil and make a hole in its cover, and put it on that herb which has been burned in the mouth of the womb, thus with calament, rue, aneth, chamomile, chicory Arabic and Cassia wood and Santureja." "All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the oil, and put that on the fire."
"And then put a reed cannula into the mouth of the womb, and hold it in such a way that the vapor comes to the cavity of the womb."
"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the placenta will come out with great speed."
"But if this treatment does not work and it is not expelled, then you order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in an ointment of althea, and then insert that into the womb and try with that to find the placenta, and when it has been found, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the wall of the womb, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the placenta, pull it out little by little according to the right path so that the mother does not suffer from violent traction." "It is necessary that they be moved on both the right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with the medication of oil with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to fatigue yourself with repeated attempts at abstraction, but rather what comes out of her into the mouth of the womb should be put on the thing of the woman, and then cauterize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it disappear little by little over a few days and will dissolve and come out."
"But when it disappears, there will be a foul smell rising to the head and stomach, and that will bother the midwife, and therefore fumigations and remedies appropriate for it should be administered."
"But some of the Ancients have already used fumigation with rue and dried figs."
"The form of the instrument with which women are fumigated for retention of menses and placenta:"
"Make a vein or wound opening."
"And place the thin end of it in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and apply the smoke gently over the embers of the fire."
"And hold that until that smoking is consumed, then repeat another."
"Treatment for a non-perforated child's anus."
"Some children are born and their anuses are not perforated, which are both narrow and closed." "Therefore it is up to the midwife to pierce that opening with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the rectum."
"And apply a poultice made of wool soaked in wine and oil; and apply this ointment until it is healed."
"But if you fear that it may be closed, then place a cannula in the track for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
"And if there is closure of the anus due to consolidation of a plug or an abscess, then it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and apply what has been said about the cure and the lead."
"Treatment for fistulas that come from there."
"The fistulas that begin in the lower part of the buttocks are usually hard and large, which begin near the anus outside or in the space between the thighs."
"And it is one fistula or more."
"And since that hard swelling is old and runs with humid pus or thin purulent matter, sometimes there are some penetrating fistulas."
"And those penetrating fistulas are known by what flows from them through the exit and by the windiness; and sometimes there is a feeling of discharge, and it often comes out as worms."
"And sometimes from those fistulas there are penetrating fistulas into the bladder and into the urethra, and into the junction of the vagina and into the rectum."
"And how a penetrating fistula into the anus is known and not penetrating, is by inserting the tip of your finger into the anus, and gently inserting a thread of sinew or iron in the fistula when there is no tortuosity."
"But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert a thin thread of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the thread or the hair on your finger."
"And if you do not feel that one at all, and there is no cause of discharge or worms or windiness through the track, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then you can proceed to the cure."
"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its meaning is the emission of urine from it and prohibition of it until that place in medicine is consolidated."
"But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vagina or into the bone and there is pain in the area, then its sign is that the thread should pass through here, if there is not tortuosity into the bone, and there is pain in the area of the part; and that pus always comes from it; and that medication does not help, nor is it consolidated with an ointment."
"And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is the effort and futility of foolish physicians on which we place our trust."
"But in that one which is not penetrating and is not old, cure with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said."
"And it is that the pain wanders between your buttocks and mainly around your anus, raising its mounds inside, the cheeks of your buttocks leaning towards its belly, and gently insert a thread of lead or sinew if there is tortuosity in the fistula until you know where the thread goes."
"And if that one feels the pain around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert the tip of your finger into the anus."
"And if you feel the thread already passing through the finger that you inserted into it openly penetrating, other than what you feel between your finger and that one or flesh, then know certainly that that one is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, for there is no cure in it, as we have said."
"But however some say that it is cured in some men."
"And of the medication by which one hopes for its improvement is that you ignite a cautery with fire according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and again repeat it two or three times until you know that all those tissues surrounding the fistula are already burnt, which resemble the feathers of birds."
"And then treat it with hot poultices wrapped in linen until all those tissues that are burnt are covered, and also treat it with medicines that generate flesh and consolidate it, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then know that it will not be healed at any time by another cure."
"And if the thread goes in and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that one and the thread that is wrapped in flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula runs along the surface of the thigh, then cut off the thigh from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it cut with the thread, and let the section reach to where the end of the thread goes, and through the thread it will be released and healed."
"And then cleanse those tissues surrounding the fistula which resemble the feathers of birds, and do not leave any cause for them to remain."
"But if bleeding happens sometimes during your operation when you are cutting those tissues, then the harm that is done is from pus and a light instrument should be cauterized with fire or with an acute medicine, for cautery with fire has two good habits: it is burning of those burnt tissues, and abstraction of blood and drying out of humidity."
"And then treat it with hot poultices wrapped in linen or in torn cloth until the place gets warm, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate hard flesh and consolidate."
"And so medicines in which there is astringency and dryness, when the wound is healed then it is already healed and does not need repetition."
"But if the fistula goes inside the anus of the buttocks and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that."
"And therefore if the thread is cut and between you and it there is wrapping of skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on that one but according to the way of faith and hope."
"And that cause can be managed in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut it off until the concavity of it is achieved through which you can enter your finger and perform the operation suggested; and do not proceed with cutting so that you do not wound the lachrymal sac containing the coccyx, and that accidents happen over the judgment of the estate without its will; and then treat it with water as we have said for strong wine will heal quickly; or extend that wrapping and cleanse that pus which dries out that until near to the anus as we have said, either with a thread or with another instrument of sharp point, and then cleanse those tissues surrounding the fistula which are in the section through which you can cauterize them; and then make an effort to restore all the wound by cutting it off, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the parting of the buttocks, then pus will leak out because of illness." "Some fistulas are finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, on the side of the buttocks near the surface of the body and on the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, similar to those used for preparing hearts."
"Then insert the probe into that field enveloping it with five fingers or around those; and then insert the probe with forceps inside the fistula until you reach its concavity."
"But if you are penetrating near the edge of the anus from behind, then remove the probe from that path in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus; and then pull out the end of the probe and adjust both ends evenly. Then tighten each one and leave it like that for one or two days. And when more tissue has been cut into the flesh, carefully remove that which is between those pieces of flesh which are between the two ends of the probe."
"And then cure the wound until it has consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in whatever manner you have prepared, but do not be too eager about it because otherwise you might injure the skin. And then heal that wound."
"The shape of the spatula used to split open the fistula is like this: one end is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so as not to cause unnecessary injury, as sometimes happens."
"For the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows through the incision."
"Hemorrhoids come in two kinds: either they are between the buttocks resembling small coal piles, or they are like hard lumps of resin." "And those that are small and large, from which blood constantly flows in one place, many of them, and some are outside the anus, and at its extremes."
"But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which citrine water or a little blood with continuous flow comes forth, and they are according to the color of the body."
"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and squeeze until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear." "Then you grasp them with a forceps or your nail and immediately cut them at their roots."
"But if the forceps cannot hold onto those because of their humidity and softness, then grasp them with rough cloth or cotton or a wool pad, squeeze them out with your fingers like that, and immediately cut them at their roots. Then sprinkle some powdered myrrh on the incision so that it may cauterize those wounds instead; or cauterize them as has been described in the chapter on cauterization." "And then treat them with another cure until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then wash it with water from the anus and let it be gently evacuated when the patient squeezes."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight. Take them with your nail or with forceps and cut them. Then treat them with water as mentioned earlier until they are healed."
"And when you have made the incision, it is necessary to stitch them closed in this way: take a thread and wrap it around a needle, then insert it into each of the wounds above. Then make the needle penetrate into the other side's root, and wrap both ends of the thread perpendicularly on the farther side from the needle. Then tightly tie the hemorrhoid with a knot, and cut off the excess thread and remove the needle."
"And do this to all of them, leaving one untreated so that the excess blood may flow from it."
"Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and have the patient remain in bed for some time." "And leave it alone until it has dried. Then treat it with a poultice or another cure until it is healed."
"And when they are old and do not respond to medicine, then you must open them with a punctum spatula or your nail so that they become moist, and remove the scabs from above which prevent them from healing. Then treat them until they have healed."
"Then scrape out those fistulas with a sharp point so that much blood does not flow and they are not irritated. Then treat them until they have healed."
"Know that 'almesamir' is another name for hemorrhoids, and they are not always red but resemble the head of a nail in color. They occur throughout the body, especially around the buttocks and anus, where they cause pain during bowel movements."
"And therefore it is necessary to cut what is in the hemorrhoid's path, grasp it with forceps or fingers, and remove it from its root. Then treat it."
"And if you wish, cauterize them according to what has been described in its own chapter."
"But a 'verruca' is a small, rough, fistulous prominence on the surface of the body. Many times they appear in many children."
"And its treatment: stretch and cut it, or tie it with thread or hair until it dries up." "If you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said, with fire or an acute medicine."
"But 'formica' is a small, downy or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body, especially on the forehead. When it is touched, it feels like an ant bite, and they appear all over the body."
"To treat it: take a quill from an owl or vulture feather and make it strong. Place the quill on the 'formiga' so that its circle encompasses all sides of it. Then rotate your hand with the quill until you have incised what is around the 'formiga,' and press down on the skin's surface to remove the 'formiga' from its root."
"And if you wish, do this with a copper or iron needle according to this method:"
"Make the tip of the needle thin, blunt (i.e. not perforated), and wrapped with wax to ensure that it slides smoothly over the skin's surface when rotated."
"And if you wish, cauterize the 'formiga' according to what has been mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery concerning 'athley.'"
"On the shape of instruments used for cautery."
"Sometimes cautery is performed with silver, brass, copper or iron melted and hammered. Sometimes instruments are made small or large according to the size of the patient, as those that are used for treating young children should be small; and those used on patients with round buttocks or dolorous ulcers should have small cauteries."
"The shape of a large and dull cautery:"
"The head of the needle above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should differ from where the bag is tied as shown here:"
"The extremity of the pus that is within it, which has entered into the anus, should be made deaf (i.e., closed) with a gentle, subtle motion; and on one side of its entrance there should be two threads, and on the other side one thread, whose width should be according to the thickness of the rays of pus, making a smaller one for a smaller [amount of] pus."
"The bag in which the medications made from bladder or sheepskin are placed should have an opening of one palm's width."
"And it should be pierced by many threads, as it is turned; and the space between the threads should be the thickness of a finger."
"And then firmly insert into those threads a hot, warm cloth that has been moistened with ten parts of honey or wrapped around them; and secure it tightly with that cloth. And when the bag is placed in it, tightly close the opening of the chest between two fingers with strong pressure, and then wrap it around each thread: But note that the manner of wrapping should be such that you fill the bag with the medicine, which has been warmed according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and make sure that it is not too hot nor too cold."
"And then have the patient lie on their back, elevate their buttocks and place underneath it something soft such as felt or wool; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then gently insert it into the anus, and then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it two or three times vigorously until all that is in the chest has been evacuated into the bowels, and then remove the chest and have the patient bring their buttocks down to the bed."
"And if the medicine causes an evacuation of that kind, hold it as long as possible; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is even better for his recovery."
"But if you cauterize him in illnesses of retention of urine and discharge from the bladder, then you should repeat the cautery until he is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or tender fistulas in the anus, then the cautery should be very subtle and gentle, using those cauteries with which children are cauterized."
"On the treatment of plagues."
"I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of plague about what was fitting for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with my hand and medicines according to their completeness."
"The plague is various in accordance with what causes it and according to the location where the plague occurs."
"And the causes by which many times plague is brought about are thus: impact of stone, or incision with scissors or knife, or perforation with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or resembling those of many causes."
"But the plague that is in the parts of the body are thus: plague that falls on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or hip, and resembling those of the limbs."
"And I am recounting the treatment of some plague for which that reasoning and rule applies to other plague as well."
"And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder of composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"So I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider whether it was caused by an impact with stone or similar. If the chain has only been broken and the wound is large and you fear that apostema caut may happen afterwards, then quickly perform cephalic flebotomy and do not delay this; and remove from there as much blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, especially if the blood issuing from the wound is little."
"And let flebotomy be done on the opposite side of the wounded part, and take care that the patient avoids exposure to wind and wine and coarse foods."
"But if you prohibit any cause due to smallness, then let the diet be reduced, and do not approach meat or wine."
"And if an apostema caut occurs over the wound, then cut it open and rinse with rose oil as usual or with wine in which there is styptic."
"But if you are sure of an apostema caut, then pause over the wound until it has its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recommend later."
"And if the air has already changed that, then pause over the wound until it is healed."
"But if the wound is large or was caused by a cut from a sword or similar and the edges of it are not approximated by forceps, then approximate them with suture according to what I will recommend about the suture of those."
"But if the wound is already laid bare to bone and tendon and there is only a slight suspension, then cut that open and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in place of the chain, and command the patient to avoid coarse foods: heads of cabbage and leeks and similar, until it is composed."
"And if you find putrefaction in the chain and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that corruption and throw it out, and cure it."
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not cut off by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not help, then cauterize until the blood is cut off."
"And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light. Therefore, you powder those with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air changes them."
"And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of unripe olives one part, dragon's blood one and a half parts, quicklime three parts; let all be thoroughly pounded and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and let it be held by good compression until it adheres to it, and let it be coagulated with its own blood."
"And then compress it above with forceps and leave it alone, and do not remove it while it is like that until it becomes apostematous, because the medicine does not depart from it until it is healed."
"And sometimes you can do this alone with cautery when unripe olives and dragon's blood are not at hand."
"And this same operation is done in large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and compress them, and these are fresh wounds with their own blood which the air has not altered."
"And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then this powder does not have its intended effect. Rather, cure those with what we have said: pause over those wounds with clean dressings dipped in oil or with flour paste with water and honey until corruption stops; and then cure them with other remedies until they are healed."
"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in the wound and it is small, then extract that with a hook."
"And I speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows."
"Concerning wounds of the neck."
"But if a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head."
"But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve there is nothing to be done but avoid treatment of it with anything that causes great astringency, such as verdigris and vitriol and similar substances because they harm nerves and harden it." "And do not compress the wound with any hot cause because the substance of nerves is hot and their continuation is with the brain, which is the seat of all members."
"And if it is cured with light medicines thus: the wound washed with rosewater, sometimes infused in sweet oil or not, and turpentine when washed with rosewater, and other ointments according to this manner, humid dressings."
"But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or compress the lips of it, and then cure it with powders until it is healed."
"But if there is depth to the wound or if it occurs in the lower part where putrefaction has taken hold, then perforate it at its deepest point."
"But if an artery has been cut in the wound and bleeding has occurred, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so."
"But if the vertebrae of the neck or all have been broken and the veins of the neck are saved, then approximate the lips of the wound with sutures over the spine of the neck and do not touch it; draw them together and reduce them to their natural figure, and then compress them with a suitable splint, and leave them alone for several days; and then cure them with dressings in which there is astringency and excitement until they are healed."
"But if the wound has reached the bone and caused fracture there, then explore it with probes, and then if there are fragments of bone, remove all those that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it alone until the wound has putrefied and separated, and its inflammation has been alleviated."
"And if the wound is fresh then powder it with the powder that I have recommended for you." "But if there is a fistula in the wound, then cure it with that which is mentioned specifically in its chapter."
"If it is a puncture from a lance or scalpel, sometimes its depth should be considered. Then you should examine whether the boil has wind (air) inside it when the patient exhales; then you will know that the boil is deadly."
"If the boil is not deep and it's fresh with its own blood, then you should pause the operation at the first hour of powdering. Do not stretch that area so that the blood is not retained in its depth and does not return to the heart and worsen the condition, but pause there with gentle attraction, and wipe it twice a day."
"If the ointment is not available, then you should pause at the opening of the boil's mouth to wait for it to absorb whatever humidity there may be. And make sure the patient sleeps on the boil so that what is inside can drain out."
"But if three or more days have passed since the boil appeared and there has been no spasm nor heart tremors nor constriction of the throat in the patient, and they show other good dispositions, then you know that the boil is safe. Then cure it with warm compresses and any other treatment until it is healed."
"But if the boil's healing is delayed and all this time has passed, then you know that it has already become a fistula. Cure it according to its chapter."
"And if the boil is caused by a cut from a razor or knife and it's simple on the surface of the skin or back, then cure it with what is preceded by stitching if it's large, or with powder if it's small."
"But if there is already bone involvement and some pieces have been cut off from it, then twist the boil and try to extract those pieces if they are separate." "But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the boil can be pushed out, because their extraction is eased that way."
"And for other accidental boils in other members, the treatment is the same as what has been said [for other kinds of boils]."
Of abdominal boils.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, small, or moderate.
And small disruption is difficult to achieve in another way, and so reducing it is also difficult, unless you quickly try to introduce it back into its own place before it opens up and becomes enlarged, because then introduction into it is difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one there is no difficulty reducing the bowel, just as there is none in the two kinds mentioned above.
And know that suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and convenient for sutures of other boils on the body.
And the other two sutures are proper to other boils, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I will recount each one with exposition and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the boil is small and some cause of the bowel comes out through it, and it's difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as said above, or when swelling has come to the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this happens, then you should cut it open in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in water boiled alone, or water with squinant, cyperus, and spica, and embroches, so that the swelling may be resolved within the bowel.
And sometimes it happens with this medicine in which there is astringency, and it's better that water alone be used for resolving the swelling.
And therefore when you see that the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the bowel with water in which there is altitude and mallows, because by this means entrance into it is made easier with little harm.
But if entering the bowel has been prevented by this treatment, then cut open the disruption a little with an instrument that has been inserted with smegma.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and not necessary to cut open, so that there may be no occupation with cutting unless it is necessary and urgent.
Of instruments: what shape they should have
One end of it is cut off sharply and the other not-sharply, with a subtle point that is not too sharp like a spatula, but slightly obtuse.
And therefore when the boil has become enlarged and the bowel comes out, then its reduction should be done according to its natural form, in its own place if possible on that, because it's better.
But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and elevate their buttocks as much as their head; but if it's in the upper part of the belly, then you should elevate the head and place the feet higher than the shoulders.
And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always pay attention and consideration to this so that the part in which the boil is may be higher than the other.
And do this also for large boils and moderate ones.
And for small boils pause this: that you have prepared yourself, and especially make sure that the person who ministers has his hands between your armpits, holding the disruption completely with one hand and adjusting its lips, and especially uncovering it from that which should be sutured first.
And this is the common way of suturing: one in which you take a needle, or count needles according to the amount of the width of the boil; and then leave the end of the disruption from the middle finger of your left hand, and stretch the needle through one, so that you do not put thread into both ends of the cord with two threads on either side of the cord of the digits inside that part, until you have made it penetrate that part; and you already have four orders.
And then stitch with doubled thread around the needle, sometimes two parts at once, and especially join both lips and the boil by proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that, and then tie it with thread like the first needle; and do not cease doing this if necessary until you have completed the contraction of the boil.
And let the needles be moderate between thickness and subtlety because thin needles scarcely incise the flesh; but thick ones have difficult entrance into the cord, therefore they should be moderate in thickness and subtlety.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed at both ends of the cord nearby because then the flesh will be scarcely incised and the boil will heal before its consolidation.
And do not prolong suturing so that the boil may not be prohibited from consolidation.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not cause discomfort while sleeping; and you will apply powdered ointments on both sides of the sutures, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the boil is consolidated.
"And this type of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds because it only takes one or two needles to close them."
"And the second type of stitching is as follows: you should administer it by suturing all four extremities (the neck and both ends of the scrotum) in one go, using a needle with thread that is fine and thin."
"And then, when the needle has pierced these four extremities, you should reduce the needle of that first part where you started, so that the thread pulls the skin together from the inside out, making the stitching like sewing cloth with which the skin is drawn tight."
"And pause between each stitch for a duration equal to the thickness of the little finger."
"And this stitch is known among men."
"And with this stitch, I sewed up the wound that had occurred in a man's belly who had been stabbed with a knife. The disruption of the wound was more than a palm wide and extended from the gut around two palms near the middle of the belly to the center of the member. And then I reduced it after 24 hours, as the gut had been forced out by the wound."
"And the wound was consolidated in the space of about fifteen days and he recovered and healed. And around that time, he lives for many years and returns to his former condition."
"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed. And by miracle it happened, for I did not heal him with any ointment, since there was no place where an ointment could be applied or any medicine used. Instead, I simply paused over the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water mixed with honey until it was healed."
"But you should know that there are two kinds of stitches proper to narration, according to the Word."
"And it is that you begin with a running stitch, and insert the needle from the outer part towards the inner part."
"And when the needle enters the bone and that muscle according to its rectitude and length of the entire body, leaving the extremity of the hip joint in which you inserted the needle; then make the needle penetrate from inside out at the other extremity of the thigh."
"And then when you have made that penetrate, now make it penetrate again into that same extremity of the thigh from outside to inside; and leave the extremity of the hip joint that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside."
"And then make your penetration with that through which you made it penetrate into the hip joint at the extremity of the thigh which is on the inside."
"And therefore start from this side and pull that with the extremity which is of the hip joint on the other side, and extract the needle from the bone which you penetrated, and then reduce it into that bone and sew the extremity of the hip joint which is on the other side with this extremity of the thigh; and extract that from the bone which is on its part."
"And do this once or twice and then do it again from inside according to that example."
"And the sum of this manner of suture is that you should sew with silk sutures with which you sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the hip joint once from the side of the bone's extremity, and leave that other time inside until it is completed."
"And the second species of suture which is particularly mentioned by Galen, and this is about it and for its treatment, is that you should sew it according to semilunar form with which some doctors sew it, in such a way that they approximate all parts to their corresponding parts according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of the bone, and this is done as I have recommended."
"See that you leave the needle in the extremity of the thigh at your disposal from the outside, and make it penetrate into the inside in that sun, and leave two extremities of the hip joint; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two extremities of the hip joint."
"And then turn those casings around, and make each casing penetrate from the inside to the outside in two extremities of the thigh on the other side than that which is on the contrary side."
"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture of which a preceding remark was made."
"This is Galen's speech"
"And some say that abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into each a thread, and begin with needle insertion from where it is necessary to do so, and make it penetrate inside the other side according to the suture of those who sew the entrails evenly."
"And know that when rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, at that time abdominal suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen."
"However, the judgment of plague is judged by other plagues."
"The cause is this: when you manage to extract the recent plague with its blood before the air alters that, and return the intestine and cover it well and prepare it properly, then pause over that powdered medicine."
"And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those cloths which are present there and make them dry and wring out their juices, and let them be well washed and examined; and treat it thus as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed."
"But if you are not present, then pause over that immediately because it begins to grow warm, thickens and changes color daily as I have taught you until it is healed, for you do not need another treatment in many situations when the plague is simple."
"But if you fear that the plague might communicate to cause injury to the principal limbs, then you should immerse lion's wool in good quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it around the affected area and leave it on."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its bowels, for this often happens, then mix it with wine and black treacle, and especially if the decay has reached the bowel and is difficult to expel from within the cavity."
"And know that that which is in the large intestine is of easier healing than that which is in the subtle intestines."
"And it is difficult to heal because the bowel called 'gegunu' does not receive healing for any plague that falls into it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and its size which is in those, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its closeness to the nature of nerves."
"But if that which proceeds from the plague is flesh, and you obtain it fresh, then cut it according to your skill with which you reduce swollen intestines."
"But if it has passed into it some time and is now green or black, then you should press it with quicklime on the location that is discolored by it, so that flows of blood may come forth, for in the flesh are veins and arteries."
"And properly cut away that which is other than the limb, and hang two extreme points of the quicklime from the edge of the plague forceps, so that over you there may be alleviated the attraction of it, for then you should have discharge of the flesh and emission of the branch of the plague."
"Memorandum on Plagues when they occur in the bowel."
"When there is disruption in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, for example thus: one man who had been plagued in his belly with a lance wound and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and had made a fistula, but it was handled gently and with ventilation."
"Then I pursued the cure of it although it was not yet confirmed in its healing, but I ceased to probe that which had been healed and the location was consolidated."
"And I put that I saw the location already consolidated, but the illness that befell him because of the mishap in his belly did not occur again; and no one was harmed by this mishap and they remained in their usual dispositions eating and drinking, and properly entered into baths and were exercised in their words."
"And already some experienced ones say that when plague occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it ought to be tied in this manner: namely, you should take frogs with large heads; and properly adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it seizes on those and stretches its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not dissolved."
"And properly place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this with frogs one after another according to the quantity of all the plague."
"And properly reduce that and sew up the plague, and those attached heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed, and no harm befalls anyone."
"And it is possible that the bowel may be tied with subtle thread which is made from the gut of an attached beast, for it is more like a needle; namely you should take the extremity of these guts, and let it be well defleshed, and properly tie the extremity of it with a thread of it, wrapped around, and then insert that thread into needles and sew it up with that bowel, and reduce that in the disruption."
"And this manner of suturing with frogs is but a way of trust and hope."
"But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, for then it is only subtlety, and not healing of it at all."
"On the cure of zuchem (fistula)"
"You should know that every ulcer and abscess, once opened and ancient, becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continually discharges pus without being cut off; then, in any limb it may be, generally it is called a fistula, which we call that same."
"A fistula in truth is a knotlike fleshy growth, hard and white, which causes no pain, having a cavity like that of the eye socket. Thus it is named that hollow ulcer or ulcer with an indentation."
"And sometimes in men there is a moist ulcer which discharges pus; but when the moisture is cut off, it heals in some hours." "Sometimes this moisture is thick and scanty, copious and thin."
"I have already explained all these causes, their signs and their treatments with medicines in the division."
"And so I want to tell you about the treatment of fistula, which is performed through an operation using a knife."
"And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some are related to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the bowel, or the urinary bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the spine, or to one of the joints composed by composition such as that of the hand and foot. And some are close to the main member and similar ones."
"And therefore those fistulas which are of this kind have difficult healing and do not receive treatment, and dealing with them is a matter of trial and error and ignorance."
"And if there is one of these fistulas whose depth does not reach any of the places I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and you want to know its extent, then take a probe of silk or iron, and if the fistula goes straight ahead, insert it into it."
"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, because lead due to its weight follows the curvature of its course."
"And if the fistula has many horrifying branches, it is not possible for you to mark them with a probe."
"Then cleanse the openings for their openings, for the moisture used to cleanse that one will go towards the others and cause them to flow."
Translation:
"And once you have stood on all those causes with true steadfastness, then proceed to the treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you consider now whether the fistula is apparent near or in a safe place, far from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places which yield to you and are spoken of."
"Now you dry the fistula according to what is said before about its nature, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh or of skin and similar, and cure it inside until it is healed."
"But if the fistula is of great depth and is according to rectitude, then it is necessary that you insert that into the perineum as far as it will be possible for you, and appropriately cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; and appropriately administer hot cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those inside the concavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron."
"And do this many times inside until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rough in the concavity of the fistula from corruption."
"And appropriately restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh inside until it is healed."
"But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended."
"But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you should be certain about it, then you incise it and dry it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as thus we have said."
"But if the bone is exposed and is in no corruption or blackness, then you scrape that inside until all corruption is removed; and appropriately cure it with that which causes flesh to grow inside until it is healed."
"And if it is not healed and continues to throw out pus as before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; and therefore you uncover it carefully again and meticulously make the cause of it clear and cleanse it with the final cautery of your choice, and appropriately restore it."
"And therefore if it is healed, good; but if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body which has not been reached, and therefore there is nothing else to do but leave it."
"And if the corrupted bone is small or can be removed, then you remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that."
"But if there are large bones, then meticulously perform the extraction of all those, and leave none behind without your cautery."
"But if you encounter any difficulty in the incision of the humidity and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh which are here, and cleanse the bones."
"But if you have not prepared to remove the bones at your discretion, then pause over the wound that produces the wound and leave it alone until that is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not consolidate but rather be constrained by the section which you have incised in your operation."
"Wait, if you fear it, pause over the wound submerged in threefold oil, or wound submerged in Egyptian pitch, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments dry up and the bones are separated from their attachment, then attraction is eased."
"But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and what of it is corrupted is only its surface, then scrape that alone with a curette until that blackness and corruption are removed, and appropriately restore the wound."
"But if what of it is corrupted is a large part and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise there where the corruption has reached, and therefore cure it until it is consolidated."
"And I advise you that which befell a man in his thigh for which he paused and had helpers on your operation."
"A young man around 30 years old happened to have pain in his thigh, and it was on the inner side of the thigh where there was matter inside the body which had reached the thigh, and it was a case of an abscess with a large abscess, and not from any external cause."
"And therefore the time was extended with that because of the error of doctors until the abscess burst and there was much matter flowing out, and its cure was appropriately paused until the thigh became fistulated, and many orifices were made in it which all flowed pus and humidity of the body."
"And therefore he consulted many doctors for about two years, and there was no knowledge among them but in the art of it until I was called."
"And when I saw his thigh and the matter that flowed from those orifices through a large body, the whole body of that man was already stiffened and his color was yellowish."
"And therefore I inserted a tent into one of those orifices and reached the bone with it."
"And appropriately I searched and examined all the orifices and found that they had come from all parts of the thigh."
"And therefore I took courage and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone which was rotten, and I removed that corrupted part which was earthy and rotting and blackened; and already a part of the thigh had been corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle."
"And therefore I covered what had been discovered and prepared by me of the bone that was laid bare."
"I judged it not to be in the bone but only that corruption which I had cut off and covered, and I had already decided."
"And therefore I paused the restoration of the wound with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, but it did not consolidate."
"And therefore I reopened and discovered over the bone again following the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone."
"And covered what seemed to me of that corruption, and therefore I continued the cure and restoration appropriately, but it was not restored."
"And therefore I discovered again over it the third time and did not cease to incise little by little particularly on the bone until about a palm of it was incised, and that extracted with its marrow, and appropriately restored it with medicines, and it consolidated easily and healed."
"It is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of his weakness and for the poverty of his tolerance and fear of death in him, because he was always depressed because of excessive evacuation with syncope."
"And therefore it was healed by entire healing, and nothing remained in place of hard bone or flesh; and his disposition in his body was good and he returned to his strength; and he changed his habits and did not do anything contrary to walking nor any harm in any cause."
"But if the bone is prominent in place of the body, then it is necessary that you cut it according to this manner: and that you take linen and stretch it over the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone else to extend it on his side; and pause that first linen with another thicker linen; and appropriate cover it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh towards its sides, and uncover the flesh over the place where you want to saw in order for the saw not to touch the flesh."
"And place a cloth or table beneath the bones decently, for when you do this, it does not hinder the saw from cutting rotten flesh."
"And ensure that the sawing is done gradually on the rotten spot, for if it is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear on its surface to touch, then it must be sawn from another side."
"And if the bone is rotten and does not stand out, then one continuous piece is made with another, and the corruption is in the middle part or in a part of it. Therefore you uncover all the flesh from every side; and then place a cloth beneath, and saw that of the first part where there is corruption, so that the sawing may be continued on the other part."
"And saw according to the location of the corruption, a little bit at a time, as we have said."
"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut into that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
"But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not a matter for cutting but rather for treatment."
"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult. However, you must inquire into the corruption and find out how it appears to you, and then abrade that area and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with each remedy make sure that you do not harm any vein or nerve."
"And know that incising tools and saws for incising these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity. Therefore, you must prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation."
"And know that this operation indicates to you the type of instrument that you will need. When you have great knowledge and long experience in the ways of this art, and are familiar with the symptoms of illnesses, then you already know what is suitable for each instrument for every illness."
"And here at the end of this chapter, I give you the number of instruments that you will use simply with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others." "Shape of saw:"
"Form of another saw:"
"Form of another large saw:"
"Form of a rasp:" "The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a star-pointed key head, and its points should be in the shape of alstar points."
"And it is not sufficient that with this rasp you rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide."
"Form of a smaller razor:"
"Form of a broad razor:"
"Form of another saw suitably made: let it be arched as high as possible and sharp like iron, and its side blades should be suitably made like a descending punch." "Form of it:"
"Form of razor with concavity:"
"Form of another fine razor:"
"Form of another razor with curved tip:"
"Form of a small rasp resembling an awl:"
"Form of another smaller incising tool:"
"Form of yet another incising tool: this one is similar to a rasp, and its tip is like a saw. It is used in many places on the bones."
"Form of the rasp which is suitable for the ratio of that which is perforated by the bones:"
"And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point."
"And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly all the causes that we have mentioned regarding razors, incising tools, and saws."
"Of bone cutting and sawing."
"Extremities can be shortened either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause. This may happen because you have treated the corruption with medicines and yet there is no improvement. Sometimes, the corruption may spread to other members without any apparent cause. In such cases, it is necessary that you incise that member where the corruption occurs so that the illness can be alleviated from death or malice, which is a greater damage to the member."
"And the sign of this is that the member becomes black where it has been burned, even though no fire was there. Or, putrefaction approaches with blackening within which corruption occurs and extends throughout the entire body; therefore, you should incise that one."
"And similarly, if corruption is due to the bite of some venomous cause such as that of a scorpion, mare's tail, viper, or similar ones."
"And if the corruption or bite is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread to the hand."
"And similarly, if it extends to the hand, then you should incise that one from the wrist joint so that corruption does not spread to the arm."
"And if it goes further than this, then you should incise the arm at the elbow joint."
"And if corruption passes beyond this and even reaches near the elbow joint, then it is the death of the illness. Administering another cause for cure at that point requires a larger amount of virtue."
"And similarly, if corruption extends to the toe of the foot, then you should incise that one at one of its joints."
"And if it reaches the heel, then you should amputate all of the foot." "But if it can reach the ankle, then you should incise the calf at the ankle joint."
"And if corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is nothing else to be done except to abandon it to death."
"The manner of incising the member or sawing it is to stretch the ligaments at the farthest part where you wish to incise, and stretch another ligament above that place. Then extend one ligament at each end and another on top. Separate the flesh between two ligaments using a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed, then incise or saw it."
"And it is necessary that cloth of linen be placed at all parts so that the place may not touch it, and that the illness receives proper injury and cauterization."
"But if bleeding occurs while working, then you should cauterize the place carefully or apply some powders that restrain blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed."
"And then bind the member with ligaments as appropriate and cure it until it heals."
"I also recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot. This one had the accident which I and you are recommending, which is the fourth one: blackness occurred in his foot with scorching that was similar to fireburn."
"And this corruption first appeared at his toe which then spread throughout his entire foot."
"And then that man decided to amputate his foot himself because the corruption was advancing with great force and pain. He incised his foot at the ankle joint, and it healed."
"For a long time that same corruption occurred to him in the index finger of his hand."
"And then it came to me and that same superfluity persecuted him with what I had put on his hand for the treatment of his wound. And so the superfluity did not recede, but began to spread to another finger until it reached his hand."
"And he called me to incise his hand, but I did not wish to do so hoping for improvement from that excess, and more than anything I feared the incision of his hand leading to death, for the power of the illness was great."
"And since he persisted with me, he returned to his land and eventually heard that that man prepared and incised his entire hand, and was healed."
"And I do not recount this narrative except to serve as a reminder about that which falls under this illness, and what sign it signifies and according to which sign it is operated."
"The treatment of sinus problems and the quality of cleansing with medications."
"When an abscess occurs in certain flesh members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it ruptures and perforates, and the pus comes out, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the cord that remains above it is like a thin cloth, and there has been no further corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula."
"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses upon some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus."
"And the treatment of it is that you incise that cord completely as it revolves, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, making sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption."
"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption has not yet reached its end, and there is an opening in the cord on the surface, then you treat it with a clyster."
"And if you consider the sinus, then if it is large and the arm that goes into it has a foul odor, then you cleans it with the Egyptian medicament which is made of oil, vinegar, and cinammon received in equal parts, put together in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
"And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleans the sinus with that, and strengthen the opening of it, leaving the medicine in it for a period of two hours."
"And then extract it with precision, and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is removed."
"And sometimes it is cleaned with water of ashes when this medicament is not present. And if you take the ash of vine wood and put it on the water, then boil it and cleanse that with it until you are sure that the sinus has opened."
"And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicament or the water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed together in equal parts, and also use wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine causes the sinus to adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine."
"And when you do this several times and are sure that the sinus has been removed, then cleanse it with something that causes flesh to grow in it."
"And if you take some refined diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astingent wine, or use some other medicines and ointments that have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the cannula of the clyster cannot be received into it, then widen it gradually with a small file, pausing in it with hot water wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it has been widened."
"And similarly if the opening is wide, then bring together the lips of it with stitches and leave in it the quantity that intervenes between the clyster without addition."
"And if the opening of the sinus from which the arm emerges is raised up on its sides, then dry it with pus in a place that is low down so that the arm may run freely within it, for when the arm is compressed by the pressure of the sinus, flesh will be generated there."
"And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus in the area of the pus as you wish, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs freely through it according to what pleases you and without any cause of retention remaining in it."
"But remove that which is on the opening of the sinus at every hour so that what has adhered to it may be discharged from the arm." "And so that you may know whether what flows out of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested."
"And now you shall consider the place of that joint, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is inflamed."
"And when your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is cast upon the opening of the joint has already adhered or nearly adheres, then on the third day, carefully detach it; but when you detach it, immediately change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment."
"But if from the joint a rather long space has yawned with subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it is nearly accomplished; for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh in their bandages is tardy, and of those some in whom the contrary takes place."
"And if from the joint more than ten days has issued thick pus, then you know that the joint does not adhere; and if there is tardiness in the adhesion of the joint and this is the cause prolonged, then you shall adapt medicines for drying; but if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they shall be made dry thus with fine ointment."
"And the last thing with which you shall cure it is to take some fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and let there be placed upon it old wine vinegar in its substance; and thus apply that ointment with it, and use it."
"And it seems that in this action when there is no pus, fine ointment should be used with honey, when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or else take myrrh and aloe and sesame, and grind all together and powder upon the honey while it is on the fire, and then strain that upon a cloth and apply it to the joint; and sprinkle that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and powder it upon the cloth."
"And sometimes it is administered with long pepper and the roots of celestial lilies (and that is celestial lily) and barley flour and centaurea, and use these simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and powder upon the honey which has been prepared; and use it."
"And if the joint is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that there is corruption in its premise, and therefore make an examination of the bones or of the other hard members or of the ligaments; then you shall treat it with fistula cure, as has been said above."
"On the treatment of pimples, rubbed-on ointments, nail-cutting and adding a finger and cutting."
"A pimple is an abscess that arises from beneath the nail of the finger or toe of the hand or foot; it commonly occurs on other fingers and when prolonged its treatment is less valued; otherwise it is an apostema of cauterized apostema, or corrupted, and pus emerges from it which corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting all of it entirely, and it sometimes extends its corruption to the bone so that there is a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes reddened, and its color becomes dark."
"And therefore when you have done what we said in the division and your treatment does not relieve it, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all of the superfluity that remains of the nail, and immediately cauterize the wound with that, for cautery is greatly beneficial in this."
"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and yet the edges of the nail begin to cut into the flesh within, and it starts to prick and cause pain there, then you must make a subtle incision from the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh easily, and place upon what remains of the flesh medicines that corrode and consume everything; and then apply ointment until it is healed."
"But if corruption has already entered the bone, then you must incise and extract that bone, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted."
"And if sometimes corrosion and corruption go into the finger, then you must incise that in one of its joints according to how it has spread, and then apply treatment until it is healed."
"But if the nail has received percussion or injury and there is intense pain in that place, then at first you must bleed the malady, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse cut from above to below, being careful that the cut does not extend into the flesh beneath the nail; otherwise you will cause intense pain and stimulate the birth of superfluous flesh in that place; then treat that place with something that alleviates pain."
"But what is said above, which is born in most men, is usually entirely fleshy, and often on the bones or often on the nail."
"And some are born at the root of the joint, or their birthplace is in some joints of the fingers." "But that which is born in one of the joints of the finger is not painful; and that which is born at the joint is often painful."
"And those that are born fleshy, the incision will be easy; and it is necessary that you incise it close to its root with a broad spatula."
"But that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat; therefore beware of its excision."
"But in that which is born in the finger between the joints, it is necessary at first to incise the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone, and then saw through it with one of those suitable saws fitted for that purpose, and then treat it until it is healed."
"But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their many joints or through birth defects of man born thus, or from injury or burning by fire, or from contusion, then it is necessary to remove that consolidation until those digits return to their natural form."
"And then place between their wrappings of them hot oil-soaked wool so that they are not easily consolidated; and separate those or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as necessary."
"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some digits with the palm, then you must remove that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb."
"Of incisions of veins, there are many."
"Veins are many, and they are large veins wrapped around thickly full of blackish superfluity which come into prominence in the limbs of the body, and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in those of travelers, workers, and carriers."
"Therefore you must administer a purge to the body of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
"But the treatment of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that they should be incised and that black blood drawn out; the other method is that the vein should be raised up and all extracted."
"The section of it is according to this method: first, incise the thigh with cold water at its beginning until thick blood is resolved, which is the sediment of the thigh; then bind the thigh of the sick person to the superior part of the hip joint up to the lower part of the knee with a bandage; then cut through the vein in one place, or two, or three with an ample incision; then raise black blood with the index finger at the lower part of the thigh upward and downward until as much blood as you wish and deems sufficient has been removed."
"And then bind that [the bandage/wound], and instruct them to abstain from foods generating black bile."
"And perform the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full, as is known to the patient."
"Here is how the elevation of their legs should be done: you who raise the patient's leg, if it moves easily, and then place it in a warm bath, immerse the leg's bandage with cold water until it reddens and veins become prominent; or let them exercise vigorously, if there is no bath nearby, until that member becomes scarlet."
"And then cut the cord on the right side of the vein, either at its length or at its end, and then remove it, or else cut it below where the foot is."
"And then tie off the cord with forceps and remove the vein from all parts until it appears visible to sensation. And it is necessary for one who knows that wound to decline towards blackness."
"And afterwards, with evacuation having ceased, tie off that white which was like a cord."
"Then place that rope within so it may be elevated and cast off from the chain, and suspend it with a hook."
"Furthermore, cut open that section for three days, and then remove the chain from the part above the vein where it appears."
"Then elevate it and cut that section on the other side near the stalk; then extract it and elevate it so it may be passed through the second section; and then extract it from the section above."
"And do this so that you may extract it from the section which is placed underneath or above all sections, so that all may be removed; and then cut it."
"And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a doubled needle with thread and tie that off and extract the chain, or insert it within the rope and twist it all around in whatever way." "And be sure that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult to elevate the person and cause harm due to that injury."
"And once all has been extracted, then pause upon the place of the wounded lane submerged in wine and both rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for it until it is healed."
"And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity that cannot be straightened out as we have said, then you must cut through all the parts of the twist and the locations where it is wrapped around; and also suspend it with hooks so that you may elevate it entirely."
"And be sure to guard your section so that you do not cut the vein and cause harm to it, for it will be difficult to elevate if it is harmed. Use your caution in this."
"Form of the incident with which a vein is severed:"
"It is not sharp like hooks and does not have a pointed extremity so that it may not harm the vein. It is of thick flexibility in its lion part; for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having surplus thickness as we have said."
"Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh."
"This vein is generated in the chambers in tawny lands such as Al-Aqaba in Arabic lands and in dry lands of India with little tenderness where there is neither grass nor herb."
"And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the chambers."
"Thus, the condition of this one is due to putrefaction that comes from leaving the intestines as if they were venomous serpents and worms generating between the intestines and the flesh."
"The sign of the onset of this condition is from this vein that appears in the inflamed chamber; and near the location it is congested, and near there begins the vein to emerge from the site of that congestion which resembles a plant root."
"Then, when the extremity appears, at that time you should wrap around it one piece of lead weighing as much as two dragons, and then tie it and leave the lead suspended from the chamber."
"So many times when something goes outwards due to this condition, you should wrap that in lead and tie it up." "And if it does not prolong itself, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining portion; but do not cut it from the root, for if you cut that it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the location with a bad ulceration."
"So that it may be drawn out gradually and extracted little by little, until the last of it is pulled out and none of it remains in the body."
"And from this vein, some men have said that it is as long as two and twenty palms, but I have seen one which was thirty."
"And if it is cut in the time of its treatment, then insert a tube into the wound and pierce that with a long tube into the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefying medicines to the location for some days; and afterwards treat it with the cure for apostumes."
"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes from many openings; and it is said that each opening sends forth one branch."
"And thus treat it as we have said in the division above, with what has been mentioned previously."
"Concerning cutting for worms generated under the skin, and is called bovine illness."
"This illness is called in some lands 'bovine disease' because often it occurs in oxen and there is one worm which is born between the backbone and the flesh, and it goes throughout the body pushing and pulling itself along until it tears apart the backbone and comes out."
"And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms, serpents, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly."
"And it is feared on account of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises up to the head, and reaches the brain, then often it breaks open there and enters in and destroys the brain, which happens many times."
"And therefore when you wish to treat it and extract it, first determine its course and appearance by feeling. Then constrain with something that is above it and something that is below it with pressure and binding, and then dry around it and extract it."
"And if it is caught in the flesh and not removed, then apply a caustic with fire to the location where it resides until it dies. The greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it, by which it corrupts the location as has been said."
"But if you wish that one who has come near the head to be removed from there, then constrain over the eyebrow with strong binding, and dry around it, and extract it. And let the patient use medicines to purify his body by evacuating bad putrid humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
"Concerning cutting for the illness called 'nafir'."
"This illness is called in our land 'nafir', and it is pain that comes to certain limbs, and also moves from limb to limb."
"And I have already seen that one as I will tell you about it." "I was summoned to a sick woman in a village. Upon exposing her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the forearm. After an hour had passed, I observed that inflammation spreading thus: it appeared as if it were alive and moved from place to place, but more slowly than porphyry."
"Then the pain went away from that spot and fixed itself in the muscle. It stayed there for about an hour."
"And then it moved to the other side of her body, reaching her other arm."
"And I saw that it was moving around her entire body, changing places rapidly from member to member. It was truly remarkable." "I had seen something like this before in my practice, though I had rarely heard of pain being transferred from member to member." "But I have never seen anything like this in the hospitals as I did with this woman."
"And I thought that it was because the woman was elderly, with dry skin and visible veins, which made the movement of this wind-like sensation more apparent."
"And it is necessary that this condition does not appear in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with hidden veins."
"And when you wish to treat it, if the patient feels pain, then after an hour or two has passed without any apparent sign at the hospital as we have said, then press upon that spot lightly and gently until the restricted wind-like sensation has been released, and cauterize the location."
"But if you do not see it at your hospitals, then treat it with exercise of the body and whatever expels wind. Use pills made from fetid herbs and pills containing serpentaria and similar substances."
"On arrow extraction."
"Arrows are varied according to species and according to the parts of the body where they strike. Their variety is such that some have large points, others small, concave, or blunt, which are solid. Others have three edges, while yet others have tongues; still others are star-shaped."
"And signs of brain injury include when struck by an arrow which pierces the bone and exits through the fontanel above the brain. This causes sudden loss of consciousness, darkness of vision, vertigo, heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms and confusion of intellect, vomiting of bile, difficulty speaking and loss of voice, and there appears from the wound white fluid like dust, and watery discharge like the moisture of flesh."
"And therefore, if such signs appear to you, then you should abstain from treating and removing the arrow unless it is outside."
"But signs of an arrow having struck the heart include: it is near the left nipple and feels firm where it has lodged, not hollow; there is a strong sensation like the beating of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound. Death ensues suddenly without delay."
"And signs that an arrow has struck the lung include: frothy blood issues from the wound, vessels near the throat are suffocated, and the patient's complexion changes. He exhales much breath rapidly or sighs for air."
"And if the arrow strikes the pleura which is in the chest, there is pain near the little ribs. Breathing becomes difficult with violent pain and sighing, and the muscles of all members are not moved."
"And if the arrow strikes the stomach, thereupon much undigested food issues from the wound."
"And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged there, thereupon some opening of the wound appears, or the skin is torn, or an intestine is ruptured. There is no hope in treating the removal of the arrow."
"And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled from outside, and thereupon some part of the wound appears externally. There is strong pain over the wound, therefore know that it is mortal."
"But the other members such as face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, shoulder blades, spine, collarbone, hip bone, and leg, and their counterparts of the limbs are saved according to their natural positions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisoned."
"And I will tell you what I have seen concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them."
"It happened that an arrow struck the tear duct of the eye in one person's nose. I removed it from another opening near his ear, and he was healed without damage to his eye."
"And I removed another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the socket of his eye. I left the eyelid closed and then opened it gradually until at last the arrow was exposed, but only a small part of its tip remained attached to its shaft. It was one of those sharp arrows used by the Turks, with a lion-head point and without feathers."
"And the Jew recovered, suffering no damage to his eye."
I extracted another arrow from a man named Crestian, which had fallen into his thigh, an Arab arrow it was, and it's that one with its ears; then I incised him between two tendons, for it was submerged in his thigh; then I gently removed that one, and Crestian is healed.
I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and since thirty days have passed and there is no change in his condition, I incised over the arrow and removed it, and he is healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had stuck in his back, and the wound was consolidated there; since it was necessary to remove the arrow from the middle of the flesh.
I saw a woman in whom an arrow had stuck in her belly, and the wound was consolidated inside her, and she did not change in any of her bodily functions, nor did she suffer harm from it in any way.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had stuck in his face and the wound was consolidated but the arrowhead remained, without causing much pain, and many others appeared like these.
I extracted the arrow from one of the king's princes who had it stuck in the middle of his nose and was already inclining towards the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to treat him about three days after the arrow had entered.
And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I probed it carefully with a probe, but did not find anything; but he felt pricking from behind the right ear, so I thought that that pricking was caused by the point of the arrow.
And I widened the place with an emollient plaster which has attractive and digestive virtues, being confident that the place would be opened up so that I could see the place where the arrow was, in order to extract it.
And there did not happen in the place any accidental sign that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and nothing accidental happened. And the wound became consolidated meanwhile, and the illness from extracting it lasted for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me about it.
And then I put on the wound an acute corrosive medicine for many days until it was opened up, and with a probe I explored there and found the point of the arrow subtly adhered to the shaft.
And immediately afterwards I adjusted the application of that acute medicine on the wound until the point of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and it took me more than four months to do this.
And when the wound was enlarged enough so that I could introduce forceps into it, and did not close up again afterwards, then I did not stop probing and devising about it with various methods of engineering until one day I began to extract it using forceps made specifically for this purpose, as described at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and immediately afterwards I dressed that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound became consolidated, and the illness was completely healed without any remainder.
And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may understand better what I have not described here, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood through narration nor can they be comprehended from this book.
And the wise craftsman compares little with much; and about what is present he speaks more than about what is absent; and he finds new operation and new instrument according to the descent of foreign causes of the art when they happen.
And therefore I say that arrows are not thrown out of the members in which they are stuck except by two means: either by attraction of the place where it entered, or by the opposite part.
And that which is thrown out by the place where it entered, either is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is attracted and expelled.
And if it does not happen immediately upon being struck, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it swells up and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
Similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not come out immediately, then leave it for some days and stir it daily with attraction and motion, and soon it will be expelled.
And if it does not come out even after several days, then you should bore around the arrow in that bone with a subtle awl until the location is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you should search for it with a probe, and if you find it, then attract it out with some instruments which are suitable for its attraction.
And if you cannot reach it because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the point, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you should operate on the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is held by the ears with which it is gripped, then you should loosen the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with whatever engineering you can devise; and devise how to achieve this, if not by means of the escape of the flesh through the fracture of the ears or twisting of them until it comes out.
And when you are administering the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use your hand twisted with forceps on all sides so that it can achieve its objective; and be very subtle about this so that the arrow is not broken and it is done easily for you both in attracting it out and extracting it.
And if you cannot reach it at that time, then leave it for some days until the parts around it have recovered, and afterwards try again; for now it will be easier. But if you experience counterflow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And guard your power of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and administer whatever engineering you can think of for the escape of the arrow; and do this with facility and calmness and slowness and steadfastness as I and you have recommended.
And ensure that you compress the arrow so that the illness follows its natural course according to the figure which the arrow was supposed to follow in it, for this is more beneficial. "But if this is not possible for you, then you shall perform what is possible according to your knowledge."
"But the arrows that are shot from the other side of the target, or those for which no partition has yet begun to be made in the partitions of the other side, or those whose extreme tip is felt in the partition above the nearest prop, you shall cut across it; and make your section according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then throw that one away, as it is too light to use."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then you shall twist the arrow according to its direction of entry into the bone, and extract it little by little, bit by bit."
"And if not, leave that one alone for a few days, and then remove it when it has begun to rot."
"And if the shaft of the arrow is in there too, then you shall pull it out with it."
"But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer traction, then insert a probe there, if it is not too short; curve it concavewards so that its concavity fits over the end of the arrow, and then pull it out."
"But if the arrow is concave, then you shall pull it out with a probe entering into that curve, for the arrow will be lightened by that."
"And if the arrowhead is barbed, then you must cut away all the flesh in which it is embedded, if that be possible for you; and then dress the wound with whatever seems suitable."
"And if the arrow has entered the bone, or the belly, or the bladder, or the flank, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut upon it, then cut thereupon and guard against injury to a vein or nerve; extract the arrow and sew up the wound if necessary, and dress it until healed."
"Forms of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
"The ends of them are shaped like the beak of a bird, and they have teeth like a saw when they grasp the arrow, so that it is not allowed to slip away."
"And they come in many different shapes, large and small, few or numerous according to the size of the arrowhead and its thickness, and the width of the wound and the closeness of its contraction."
"like a hook, to facilitate entry into the wound in a concave arrow and its extraction with it."
"On phlebotomy of veins:"
"The veins commonly used for phlebotomy are thirty in number, of which sixteen are in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears, called helixes; two herbs that appear on both temples; two veins located in the lacrimal ducts of both eyes, called aspiciences; a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugulars at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; two veins that are called algels; and two veins below the tongue." "But the veins that are commonly opened in the arms are five in number: of these one is cephalic, and it lies on the outer side; the people call it 'the vein of the head'. Another is median, composed of a branch of the basilica and another of the cephalic; the people name it 'vein of the whole body'. The basilica is that vein which is situated on the inner side of the arm, and is called 'cubital' by the vulgar. The funis of the arm lies upon the forearm, and this is where phlebotomy takes place when it manifests itself above the elbow. And the salvatella is the vein that lies between the little finger and the one next to it."
"And in the leg and thigh there are three veins: one of these lies below the curvature of the knee on the outer side. The second is the saphenous vein, whose location is behind the thigh on the inner side. The sciatic vein lies behind the thigh on the outer side. And there are other veins similar to these in the thigh."
"The use of the veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraine, sciatica and ulcers in the head from old injuries."
"And the manner of opening those veins is as follows: first, shave the head of the patient and rub it well with a soft cloth on both sides where the veins are located. Then place a firm bandage around the neck of the patient so that two places appear near the ears in two depressed areas of the head. Find the vein with your index finger and feel its pulse with your finger, then make the incision there."
"Then take the lancet scalpel, which is inserted, and introduce it below the vein in the elbow so that phlebotomy reaches the bone." "Then raise your hand with the vein and elbow above, and make an incision in the vein with an incising cut." "And let the length of the incision be about two fingers or thereabouts, and let blood flow out as much as you wish."
"Then press with cotton and plaster to stop it from bleeding until it is healed."
"And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this book how to perform incisions on these veins and how to cauterize them."
"But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, phlebotomy is useful for ancient migraine, chronic headache, habitual ophthalmia, and acute effusions of blood from the eyes."
"And the manner of phlebotomy on those veins is as follows: tie a cloth tightly around the patient's neck until both veins appear prominently and their pulsation can be felt with your finger. Then make the incision there."
"And then raise the elbow above the vein with your index finger, introduce the phlebotomy scalpel beneath it in an incising manner and elevate the vein upwards. Then make the incision as you would on other veins, allowing blood to flow according to your needs."
"And then untie the bandage from the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour. Then apply cotton and powder to it and press firmly with a tight bandage until it is healed."
"And their memorization and incision, as well as those of the other veins mentioned earlier in this book, have already been described."
"And the use of phlebotomy on the frontal vein is especially useful for ancient diseases of the face, migraine, redness, and foul ulcers."
"And the manner of phlebotomy on that vein is as follows: have the patient tie a bandage around their neck so that the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the 'fossor', which has this shape:"
"Place the point of the 'fossor' on that vein and pierce it with a quick strike or other cause in the manner shown, allowing blood to flow according to your desire. Then untie the perforation from the patient and press it firmly until it is healed."
"Sometimes it is opened with a lat flebotomy, but it need not be of acute point like other flebotomies; rather, it should be on the blunt end, for if sharp, it might break against the bone when subtle."
"The junction of both veins which are near the tear ducts of two eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to heat and grease in the eyes, and for facial diseases."
"The quality of the flebotomy is such that the patient should hold their head steady with a bandage, and carefully perform the flebotomy thereupon, standing above the patient's head."
"And the flebotomy should be performed horizontally for about half an inch with a thin flebotomy needle, as there is little flesh in this area. If the flebotomy needle is too sharp, it might break."
"And carefully make the blood flow as much as necessary, and pause thereupon, pressing with that until the next day, and then remove the bandage."
"But the flebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and sudden sneezing, and for facial diseases, migraine, and heat that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
"And the quality of this flebotomy is that the patient should hold their head steady and place their nose on their left hand, taking a thin flebotomy needle and inserting it into the middle of the forehead vertically, as the vein does not appear palpable here, and blood will begin to flow soon."
"Then slowly withdraw your hand along with the flebotomy needle and make the blood flow according to your needs; then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly."
"But the benefit of flebotomy on both cheeks is to relieve pain and congestion, and to prevent or treat leprosy, eczema, itching, and corrosive ulcers like herpes."
"And the quality of this flebotomy is that each patient should hold their head steady with their hands; and the operator should stand above the patient's head, while the patient sits on a stool."
"And then carefully flebotomize the vein on the long side with a large flebotomy needle little by little; then draw blood according to moderation or as much as necessary, and do the same for the other vein."
"And then untie the bandage and press both veins with a moderate compression to prevent the patient from fainting. Let him rest for the night, as the wound will be healed by morning."
"And the benefit of flebotomy on the veins at the elbows is to treat small abscesses and pimples in the mouth, gingivitis, ulcers, fissures, and ulcers around the nose and its surroundings."
"And the quality of this flebotomy is that you should make the patient sit in front of you and hold their head steady with a cloth. Then gently turn their lips and observe the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; their demonstration is through their darkness, and especially where there are small dark veins around them. Then incise each one with an oblique incision."
"But if there is doubt and you do not know which one it is, then make the incision on the larger one of those two, or where there is evident pus."
"And do the same for both veins that are above the lips."
"But the benefit of flebotomy on both veins under the tongue is to treat fainting spells that occur in the throat, uvitis, and oral diseases."
"And the quality of flebotomizing those veins is that you should stand behind the patient facing the sunlight, raise their tongue, and observe it from below. On one side there is a vein and on the other side another vein, both tending towards darkness in color."
"And then flebotomize each one; but be careful not to go too deep with your hand while flebotomizing those veins, as beneath them are arteries."
"And the veins that are commonly flebotomized in the elbow are those that are present in all men. Flebotomy of these is performed in two ways: either with a flebotomy needle dipped in myrtle or olive oil, subtly inclined; or cutting with a flebotomic scalpel called 'alnessil,' and this is its form:"
"The side of it should be like this: it is convenient for opening concave veins filled with blood, especially those appearing thick and containing turbid blood."
"And this flebotomy needle is of lesser width and has a very subtle tip. It is convenient for flebotomizing small veins containing clear blood."
"But the benefit of flebotomizing the basilica vein, which is one of three veins, is that it draws blood from diseases that are below the throat and neck, as well as from sciatica and abdominal pain."
"And it is convenient for the flebotomist, when flebotomizing that vein, to carefully observe and be cautious in it, as there is an artery below it. If they err and strike with the flebotomy needle, they will cut that artery and cause bleeding. Therefore, it is not advisable to flebotomize it with a pointed flebotomy needle, but rather cut with alnessil."
"And if the basilica vein does not appear through manifest appearance, then you should leave it and move to another one, or seek some of its branches; or flebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm where it is manifest. And cut it with alnessil flebotomy as we have said."
"But if you want to flebotomize the median vein, then it is necessary in front of the tension of the arm that you touch the place within which you know the location of the pulse. Then sign over it with your thumb; and bend the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using alnessil flebotomy as we have said. And be careful not to strike the artery some distance away from its location."
"And when you wish, as you tighten the ligature, press in the place where you have marked with your thumb. Then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
"And if blood flows like a child's urine during flebotomy and the blood is red, then know that it is arterial blood. Then lift your finger from there for some distance; remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, as often happens, then tighten the arm and leave him."
"And protect the patient from mucus of that wound. And be cautious with it for several days until it is healed to prevent infection."
"But if the bleeding does not stop and you feel that it is necessary to use a medicine for this purpose, then you have cut the artery. If it appears to you, as the end of it is contracted and the blood stops. Then take a fistful of cotton and place it there; then take some mustard seed and plaster it on; and wrap it with bandages and powder for another day."
"And if blood is cut off, it is good; and otherwise, then treat that with which the preceding was remembered to absorb the flow of blood."
"And cutting off the blood from it is difficult in many positions due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of hitting the arm's ligament."
"However, phlebotomy of the black vein is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; for this reason it consists of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said."
"And therefore one should be especially afraid during the phlebotomy of that [vein], because underneath it is a nerve; and therefore if one adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, stupor will occur, and its healing is difficult, and often it is not healed entirely. And this nerve can be seen by sensation many times, but if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not appear, then you should pause the phlebotomy with which you are performing the phlebotomy, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein lengthwise."
"The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes."
"And therefore in this case, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped phlebotomy instrument, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has neither artery nor nerve underneath."
"But nevertheless, sometimes an aposteme occurs in some people when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not touch that aposteme."
"The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the conservation of health and in hope of its benefit and caution against the occurrence of illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the veins which are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter close to meals, when signs of repletion appear."
"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least one day after three hours have passed since the previous bloodletting."
"But phlebotomy which is administered when it provokes convenience and necessity at that time, whether now or later, on any day or hour or time."
"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are at least fourteen years old, and women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth to the seventh month, and elderly people who have already passed seventy years should not be phlebotomized."
"And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw purgative, especially if there is much retained fæces in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels which are purified, and do not harm the principal members."
"And patients with sacred nausea and gluttony should not be phlebotomized until they have removed themselves from their illness or drunkenness, nor those suffering from dropsy, and moreover phlebotomy should be feared near colic pain and vomiting, near abdominal tumors, and near multiplication of coitus and work and exercise during fasting or vigils or for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal."
"And also consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so."
"And also take a bath if there is no prohibition for doing so, or stimulate with some exercise so that the blood may be subtilized."
"And pause the phlebotomy of it in the evening, around the hour of Terce, as we have said."
"And perform that evening as guarded in that day from all animal bad accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporeal accidents, such as work and superfluous effort and coitus and their like."
"And at his seat, let the causes be present in the use of which men are accustomed with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and their like according to the quantity of possibility."
"And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized."
"And also extend his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and also stretch the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice."
"And let the bandage be moderate, for a bandage that is not equal can prohibit the flow of blood, or one with superfluity, and likewise one with softening can prohibit the course of the blood equally."
"And also during the bandage, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together within them until the veins are inflated and declared to the touch."
"And also the phlebotomist should anoint his scalpel with a little ancient olive oil properly; and also let him place his index finger of his left hand over that vein, away from the location where the phlebotomy is desired, so that the vein may yield somewhat, and the percussion be situated where one of the veins which underlie the phlebotomy is struck, like strings fleeing beneath it, and those are full of windiness, and when the scalpel pauses upon them they contract beneath the scalpel, and the phlebotomist descends; and the scalpel does not open the vein, and if it opens, that vein is narrow."
"And therefore, let the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these causes."
"And also let him pause the scalpel, but if the vein is opened in one attempt, that is good; and if not, then repeat that elsewhere away from that location somewhat, or above it with haste, if the location is not inflamed."
"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then let him leave it for a day or two, and do not stretch the limb, for otherwise it would draw an ulcerous inflammation, nor take a bath."
"And also repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not let out the desired quantity of blood, then repeat the scalpel in that track according to rectitude and adjust the opening somewhat, and do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, for many people have inflammation occur due to a few openings."
"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not repeat upon it, for it serves no purpose; and pause upon it some part of the fold of olive oil, for that alleviates the course of blood." "And it is better in this location to use olive oil than any other oils."
"Similarly administer oil during any phlebotomy to prevent veins from prohibiting the flow of blood. They do this with theriac and sagazena when placed upon one of those locations, because blood becomes subtler and revolves when it's thick."
"If a large boil forms at the site of phlebotomy, as often happens, especially if not much blood has been drawn previously, or when the vein is barely opened, then you should, immediately after, place on that location a damp sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it there for an hour, as this will dissolve it."
"You should also do that near the site of bloodletting from that vein with some vinegar or from another vein."
"But if some blackness or greenness remains at the site for several days, do not worry about it. And if you wish, place over that area some plaster of aloe and myrrh dissolved in vinegar, or some plaster of mint juice or chamomile juice or something similar."
"And many times it happens that boils and swellings occur which need phlebotomy at the basilica."
"And then place your hand over it, and if you suddenly feel softness, apply pressure with your hand on that swelling, for at that moment the artery is flowing strongly. And then protect yourself by placing some of what we have said upon it, because a lot of blood flows from the artery."
"And make an emplaster with what is styptic, so that the location remains firm. And treat it with other treatments until it heals."
"And you should draw blood from each person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color that appears above the blood."
"For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly, if you find it thick, let it flow until it thins out. And likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness subsides."
"And for one who is full and strong and needs bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of a vein should be increased and the phlebotomy wound made wide."
"And in one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and let blood from him little by little over several days, and let the wound be narrow."
"It is better to make a transverse section in phlebotomy of a vein than to make a puncture."
"And this manner of phlebotomy saves from the flow of blood and from injury to nerves. And it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy made according to width and length."
"And for one who is accustomed to fainting during phlebotomy, you should treat him beforehand with a little bread infused in rue wine or simple celery seed wine and scraped. And let blood from him three or four times."
"And if it is coldness of temperament, then take beforehand in phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in syrup that is aromatic and very fragrant."
"And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy and it is due to the loss of much blood, then you should give him to drink water of meat and very fragrant syrup. And use aromatics with almonds, and let him lie down on his left side."
"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting due to evacuation."
"And whoever wants to stimulate his arm and dissolve his blood on the second day should let blood from one who has had much evacuation by phlebotomy, and whose virtue is frail. Let it flow little by little, according to the quantity of his strength over several continuous days."
"However, whoever wants to stimulate his arm and draw his blood again on the second day, and if his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
"However, whoever wants to draw blood from his body contrary to the part that declines, let it be done on the second or third day."
"However, in a body where there is little blood already scraped and it is sharp and causes fever, let blood be drawn from him once and let much blood flow. And make the opening wide so that fainting may occur, for you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse of his artery before letting blood, so that he does not die instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
"And when you want to stimulate the arm and evacuate blood again on the second day, it is not necessary to do so if the opening of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to draw blood. Then press upon that with force and curve it gently, for that is too bad."
"Let him lie down until he can be phlebotomized again. Or remove that with the acuteness of the flebotomy which is coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein. Or place upon it tyriaca alfarach or sage, and press upon it gently until the blood flows out."
"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if there is a need to provoke you to evacuate blood again and there is no excuse for it, then do so on that same spot or on the other arm in another vein."
"And the vein called 'the rope of the arm' is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or the basilica when they are not found or are obscured, for it is composed of those."
"And the quality of phlebotomizing him is that the patient should put his hand in warm water until the vein appears prominently."
"And phlebotomize strongly upon that with a bandage with moderate tightness. And phlebotomize according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor according to length."
"And let the opening be wide and let your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize him on the junction of his hand."
"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in warm water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose."
"However, if it is summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water. And in winter, the body of the blood should be kept warm in warm water."
"And phlebotomizing this vein is safer than all other veins because there are neither pulsating veins nor nerves in its vicinity."
"And phlebotomizing the wrist of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver."
"And the quality of phlebotomizing him is that you should strengthen his hand with a bandage or with your hand, because you have placed it in warm water until the vein becomes inflated and is clearly visible. And phlebotomize him transversely; and if he does not faint completely, do not worry about it."
"And be careful not to extend your hand during phlebotomy because there are nerves nearby that are devoid of flesh."
"And be sure to immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood run into it because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and prevent its flow."
"And when the blood is extracted according to necessity, then place over the vein oil and salt, so that it may not be consolidated carelessly."
"Among the benefits of phlebotomy is that it relieves illnesses of the liver."
"And do likewise in the phlebotomy of the other arm, just as you have done with the other one."
"And the benefit of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for illnesses that are in the lower parts of the body, such as diseases of the womb and retention of menses, and for the healing of wounds, old ulcers on thighs and legs, and their like."
"And the procedure for phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes friction around where the veins appear; then tie a bandage above the joint of the foot; and the place of the vein should be apparent below the said hole, from which many branches go forth on the face of the foot."
"And then perform phlebotomy on the most prominent vein or one below the ankle below the joint, for it is better and more beneficial."
"And if you perform phlebotomy on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below that on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy with that which you cut across, as if you wanted to incise it."
"And thus ends the phlebotomy."
"It is forbidden to let blood from him; therefore, you warm his foot in hot water and let the blood flow into that vessel until it is evacuated."
"And if the bloodletter errs in his first attempt, he should repeat it elsewhere, for the place is swollen. Do not fear causing harm, but rather protect yourself from nerves as we have said."
"And similarly, do the same with the other foot."
"Regarding the sciatic vein, the place is at the back of the ankle joint below the bone of departure."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from him is for a pain in the hip when it is for burning blood."
"And the quality of bloodletting from him is that he enters into a bath, and quickly and vigorously tie his chest on the right side of the hipbone above the ankle with a long thin bandage so that it does not appear except by that."
"And then when it appears, you should bloodlet from that according to each vein that is accessible and according to the cross section, which is better. Or else cut that with an incision or cut it with a section because the place is swollen."
"And it is especially common in young men. And if you cannot find that vein, then bloodlet from any branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the hand near the said little finger and ring finger."
"And guard yourself from nerves, and let the blood flow out in the amount you desire."
"Then loosen the ligature and pause on the place of the bloodletting until it stops. Then squeeze the place gently because it is easily healed."
"Of wind breaking and of its qualities for using those."
"A ventosa can be made from horns, or earthenware, or glass."
"And bloodletting is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification."
"And this bloodletting which is scarification occurs in two ways, either with fire or without fire."
"And the locations where bloodletting is performed through scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body. Of these, one is on the nape of the neck, which is the last part of the head; the middle location between two parts of the collarbone; the chin below the mandible near the mouth; the spatulas' locations; the alocostrum, which is above the end of the ribcage; the forearms, two on each arm; and the cavities, as well as the buttocks."
"And bloodletting does not extract blood from the large veins but rather from the small ones scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not draw out the vital spirits in that way, just as phlebotomy is said to do; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated."
"But if bloodletting is necessary due to illness or continually, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of it, and at any time that may be appropriate."
"And therefore, when there is a need for bloodletting due to one of those causes, especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command that bloodletting be done three hours after two hours have passed."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that it relieves heaviness in the head and prevents dizziness and fainting spells; but this should be done as part of a general evacuation of the whole body."
"And this bloodletting is performed at the location called phlebotomy of the cephalic vein."
"It is not suitable for those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh to use it, as it causes great harm."
"And therefore, it should not be used for the elderly, nor for those with hot illnesses in their head."
"But those who continuously use bloodletting become forgetful of it; therefore, you should command the bloodletter to pause his hand slightly after placing the bloodletting cup on the skin at its departure points, so as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness."
"But bloodletting at the elbow is done at the location of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica vein: therefore it treats asthma, constriction of the throat, and tearing of the instrument of respiration, as well as coughing andpletion."
"And it is necessary to remove the bloodletting cup from the elbow a little earlier than usual, because if left too long it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
"And bloodletting at the angle of the jaw treats accidental pains in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and inflammation of the face, as well as pains in the roots of the teeth. It is performed at the location of phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
"And you should command the bloodletter not to press his hand during scarification, so as not to cut the artery and cause an excessive flow of blood."
"And bloodletting from the chin treats thrush in the mouth, gum disease, and symptoms of diseases that are present there. It is performed at the location of phlebotomy of the linguual veins found on both lips."
"But bloodletting done over the two spatulas treats headache, which is caused bypletion of heat."
"And bloodletting at the two divisions of the temples treats the benefits of phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins. This is because it attracts blood from all those smaller veins found in the flesh, as well as the smaller veins connected to those larger veins, so that the attraction reaches the three veins."
"And command the bloodletter not to proceed with scarification, because the location is bare of flesh and there are nerves and arteries near it."
"And this bloodletting is performed on the ankles, treating hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers nearby."
"And it is necessary to command the bloodletter that a large cup should be used and made of brass because the location requires a strong section; furthermore, subtle bloodletting cups are poorly drawn here, and scarification with scarification is necessary."
"But bloodletting from the thighs diminishes by diminution manifests that it attracts blood from all over the body and treats ancient pains of the loins and belly, as well as the bladder. It also provokes menstruation and treats boils and ulcers. It is performed at the location of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, the angle of the knee, and two cavities."
"However, it also debilitates the whole body and causes fainting spells in many men."
"And the benefit of bloodletting at the angle of the knee is similar to the benefit of bloodletting on both thighs."
"And the quality of the position of bloodletting is that you should pause at the beginning, remove it slightly and follow up with gentle suction, and not prolong the position of bloodletting but rather pause it lightly and remove it gently so that the humours come to the location by gradual attraction." "And do not cease repeating this until you see the location already reddened and swollen, and that the color of blood appears."
"Then scars are made and suction is repeated little by little. And consider well the condition of the patients' bodies."
"Because that person who has tender flesh and rare pores should be scarified once but not more than that, so that the location does not become ulcerated."
"And command the bloodletter to amplify scarification slightly and prolong it a little, and apply suction with ease."
"And if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify twice because in the first scarification, the way for suction of the blood and its fluidity is opened." "But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired by observation."
"And if the blood is very fetid, then there should be no scarification in the third veigning so that it may be dried."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little at a time, one scarification suffices for us."
"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scars; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with prolonged scarification."
"And the term of scarification is only as deep as the skin."
"And if the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the locations of bloodletting should be anointed with lenient, open, resolvent oils; if it is in summer time, such as oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of chamomile flower; and if it is in wintertime, then oil of narcissus, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and those similar."
"If excess fluid is thick and cold, then the oil should be myrrh, or balsamite, or aloe, or aneth, and their like."
"If the patient has tender skin with wide pores, then oil should be prohibited, and instead, the places where vents occur nearby should be washed with hot or cold water of salt, or with decoction of wormwood, or with decoction of borrage, and similar remedies."
"And for one whose blood has great humidity, wash their vents with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar remedies."
"And for one whose excess fluids are thick, wash their vents with old wine, or water of hyssop, which is majoram, or decoction of dill, or chamomile, and their like."
"And it is necessary that the ventosing be done before bathing; having to be administered near to the time of bathing for one hour or two, and having to sleep near to the ventosing."
"What is it that is necessary so that a patient who has undergone bloodletting should regulate his vents before ventosing."
"At the beginning, consider if the patient or the one who should undergo bloodletting is choleric and vents over his hot and inflamed blood, then they should take cooling remedies, such as acetic grapes, endive with sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, julep, and similar ones."
"And pause their meals such as poles ( turnips), and flesh of roasted birds, and foods seasoned with sourness, and similar ones."
"And for one whose constitution is phlegmatic, let him take to drink syrups such as aloe syrup, or althaea syrup of seeds, and sumac, and sweet-smelling wine between autumn and winter; and that he be advised to use little drinking and eating, and pause from foods such as turnips, cannabis, peas, and small birds and doves."
"And on the day of ventosing and bloodletting, drinking should be greater than eating."
"And it should be given to drink to some men tyriaca alhacema, or musc medicines, such as musk or aloe syrup, before ventosing or bloodletting or near the time of it, so that their principal members are comforted and their blood is subtilized; and they should not take that scalphat."
"But the ventosings that are not scarifications are those paused over the liver, and over the spleen and gout, and over the navel, in the joints of the thighs, and the pit of the stomach; because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
"And they are not sought by those, but attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing a ventosa on the breast in a disease of bleeding of the blood from the nose; and we use that one so that it may dissolve the phlegmatic vents that stick to the member, such as pausing over the belly and navel; for that one rarifies the member, scrapes it, and removes pain because it resolves ventosity."
"And it is paused over the ears when accidents happen in their opacity or pus; for by virtue of attraction it strongly draws out opacity and eradicate pus from its place."
"And similarly it does when paused over the liver and spleen to draw out vents enclosed in them."
"And these ventosas are administered only with suction; but sometimes they are administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the diseases of the spleen."
"And this is so that the ventosa may be filled and become larger, it should be water alone boiled or water in which suitable herbs have been cooked."
"Form of ventosa administered with fire: Let the aperture of it be two fingers wide according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of pitch be as much as a palm; and let it be on the side of him, in the place that is in the circuit, as much as he, and let the wick be small according to the quantity that enters into it through an awl."
"It should be made of earthenware or glass, thick-walled, lion-shaped, egg-shaped, and round for so that it does not hurt the member by its position on it."
"And let there be in the middle of it a crosswise iron or earthenware wick on which is paused candle with fire."
"And let this ventosa be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one less according to the diseases and state of him who uses it."
"And the ventosas of the weak and emaciated are different from those of the young and robust."
"And the quality of pausing this ventosa with fire on the member is that it extends the meca with fire of decent wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses that one on the middle of the crosswise wick in the middle place of the ventosa, so that the fire may be kindled around the partition of the joints so that not the body of the sick person may be burned."
"And immediately it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and let him be over the wick that we have said, until when we have the ventosas and do not need to hold the wick and let out the vapor over that wick, then the ventosa will soon dissolve."
"And then put out the meca according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
"But in the ventosa that is administered in the disease of pleurisy with water, there is neither crosswise wick nor wick and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water and paused on the member only."
"And this is its form: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better; for it can receive a large quantity of water."
"Chapter XCVI."
"Sanguissugas are not administered on most members but on those where it is not possible to place ventosas because of their smallness, such as the throat and gums and similar ones; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their similars."
"And it is said that sanguissugas should be used when found sanguissugas that are in the muddy waters of ditches."
"And they should be placed during the day and night in muddy water until they are hungry, and that none remain in the belly of them; and immediately the body should be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and ventosas; and immediately rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and immediately pause them on it."
"And when they are full, remove them."
"If suction from the place with ventosa is possible, it should be preferred in judgment."
"But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and immediately with warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed."
"And if the body of blood is prolonged immediately after the removal of the sanguissugas, and it remains there, then you put a cloth dipped in hot water on it until the bleeding stops."
"And if the blood is multiplied, then dust it with crushed vitriol, or guallas and similar ones of the causes stipticas until the bleeding stops; or pause on the place many of cooked beans, and let them be left there until the beans adhere to the place and the bleeding stops."
"And it is necessary, if necessary, to repeat the sanguissugas when it is possible to change those."
If bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then let fresh blood be drawn from the area or place a needle in the spot where blood will come out; and immediately cover it up, for those who feel any blood soon faint.
When you want them to faint, sprinkle a bit of ground aloe over that area, or salt, or ashes, and then cover it up immediately.
Thus begins the third part: On Restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones that occur by chance.
Oh, son, know that those who brag about this chapter are foolish doctors and laymen, and those who at any time do not regard the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
And for this reason it is that this method of the Ancients in our land has been lost; and you will not find anyone now who knows all about it. And I have not added what follows here, except to make reading easier from the books of the Ancients and understanding their meaning better, so as to extract knowledge from them.
And therefore I direct myself towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
And therefore I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has been passed. Since here I have shortened it for you others and freed myself from the occupation of lengthening it; and have shortened it at the end of shortening; and have shown it at the end of declaration; and have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter One
Summary and Collections from the Essence of Bone Fractures, Before Beginning Remembrance of Members Broken in Various Ways and Their Diversities if Possible. Therefore, I shall now state the summaries of this discourse in the prologue of this chapter; and the chapters that are necessary for understanding at the beginning for artisans and for standing firm on the truth of these [summaries], so that it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art other than you.
And therefore I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or luxation occurs, it is necessary at the beginning to perform phlebotomy on that [person], or to apply a poultice, or whatever seems appropriate, if no prohibition prevents it, such as debility of virtue, or if the person affected is an infant, or elderly, or if it is time of great heat, or cold.
And moreover it should be content with its own food of fresh herbs and of the flesh of birds and of crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of avoiding an abscess, and if not afraid of effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to its first regimen, with which it is accustomed to live.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary to pasture the patient with nutritious foods of great and heavy nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and capons, and fish, and intestines of cows, and eggs, and fresh cheese, and thick wine, and similar ones, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is effected more easily and quickly.
And know that bones broken when they are in the first youth or old age in men cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature by drying of the members to which they belong.
But nevertheless nature adjusts and adapts itself to the broken bone in such a way that it adheres to the place where it has been separated, growing thicker there until it is joined together and consolidated, until the end of strength and firmness, as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient with foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Fractures differ according to the variety of limbs, for a fracture of the leg bone is different from that of the head; and a fracture of the foot bone is diverse from that of the hand; and similarly all other limbs are diverse amongst themselves.
And you have come with the memory of every kind of fracture, explained in its own chapter, separate from the others.
Many kinds of fractures occur within itself. And the kinds of bone fractures are diverse in themselves; for example, an arch fracture can occur in the stars, and sometimes they are made according to the length of the bone: such as those of the satire and asterix, additional procedures, and non-procedural ones, like when a pen is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And in every species there exists its own torment proper to the restoration of that which will come later, remembering it distinctly in its places.
Many signs of bone fracture. "Therefore it is recognized as a fracture of the bone: it is twisted, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and it becomes so when you grasp it with your hand."
"If there is no apparent twisting and no deformity felt when touching the bone with agitation, and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture."
"It is possible that there may be some twisting or small fissure present, so do not move it with your hand and compress it all at once. Instead pause on it and apply the appropriate medicine from which you have a reminder at that moment, as this will be beneficial for the location; especially if it is narrow due to subtle stricture."
"And you should know that when the place is curved and not split in two or otherwise broken during the examination, if it is entirely separated from its comparison, then you must begin immediately with the correction of it so that it may become adherent by cautery."
"And if an adherent cauterization occurs there, then leave it alone for several days until the cautery stops. And again, lift it up and engage it according to each method that you can use."
"And you should know that the restoration of that place and the cauterization of it are easier than on bone where such examination has taken place."
"And also strengthen that according to what comes to your memory of it."
"But if you have examined the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member in two parts, whether it is the hand or foot; or with your own hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand."
"And you should position yourself in such a way that the member is placed where it was originally located according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are being extended. Then perform the following: bring those additions back with engagement and according to each method that you can use in their locations."
"And beware according to your strength that no harm comes upon the sick through your operation on them or their injury. And perform yourself according to your ability, applying one bone with its companion according to their best forms."
"And it is necessary that you touch that one appropriately with your hand at that time. And if sometimes some different cause arises, correct and engage it according to the quantity of your virtue."
"And avoid violent extension and compression, as some foolish doctors do who often cause adherent cauterization to occur due to their operation or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen happen many times."
"And the quality of the restriction of the broken member is what I recommend. Therefore, know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their forms."
"And of those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, then the bandage should be made of very fine cloth."
"But those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, require a firm and strong bandage. For the bandage tightly connects the large member with equal restriction on all sides so that nothing penetrates into it."
"And then begin gently with your evacuation of the bone, placing a suitable linen there on the location of that fracture with three or four bandages according to what the member deserves. And tighten your hand slightly with the linen."
"And then take that one to the uppermost part of the location of the fracture and tighten more than you had previously tightened at the location of the fracture." "And then extend yourself with a bandage from the location of the fracture somewhat and slowly loosen the restriction little by little until you take hold of it in one great piece."
"And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken location with a bandage. And then go with those bandages to the part farthest from the fracture, and your operation should be in the restriction of the bandage and in its loosening according to what was said regarding the first bandage above."
"And then pause between the bandages with a piece of lion's skin or cloth with which the torsion of the fracture may be adapted if there is any torsion. And if not, do not add anything in it."
"And then place another bandage over it and adapt it over those bandages that are decently made. If there is no inflammation or adherent cauterization in the location, then pause on what sits beneath the cauterization or removes the inflammation. And leave that for a few days. And then tighten the bandages."
"And let the splints be made of strong cane split lengthwise and skillfully formed; or they may be made of hazel wood; or of palm branches. And let each splint be shaped according to this form and figure:"
"However, the splint placed on that fracture should be thicker and firmer than the other splints, and its length should be proportional to the size of the member. And then tighten over the splints with another bandage according to your first restriction. And then tie it above with a knot made decently as was said regarding restriction. And let your restriction be greater at the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less the restriction should be."
"And the threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of soft wool. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen some fools using ropes for binding, it is a great error when the restriction is unequal."
"And very fine threads are not convenient because you will not be able to tighten with them as much as you want. And there should not be less than one finger's breadth between splint and splint."
"If the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints near the restriction in the swollen places, then pause those with lion's skin or woolen cloth until that ceases to cause injury."
"Sometimes fracture occurs with contusion, and dislocation happens in the shoulder joint. I have spoken about that one in the chapter on singularities."
"And know that not every broken member should be immediately bound with splints on the first day. The reason is that when a member is large, it does not require splints to be placed upon it until about five or seven days have passed, according to your certainty of the arrival of an adherent cauterization."
"And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients used to restore fractures and dislocations and torsions."
"The manner of splinting commonly used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, is this: Take some powder of wheat flour, which is the meal that remains after grinding. Place it in a bag made of fine cloth or leather, and apply it over the place where there is no heat nor friction."
"And comfort him thus: sift that powder with egg white, then pause the mixture's preparation not too thick nor thin; and then use it."
"Another method for making a plaster to reduce fractures and dislocations: take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and millet seed, which is the seed of wild celery, all four ounces each; mirra and aloen, each five drachms; alochil, twenty drachms; all are ground and sieved and mixed with almond oil or egg white if the patient's complexion is scalded. Use this plaster, for it has a good composition and helps to heal lightly broken bones."
"Another method for making plaster that helps with fractures and dislocations: take millet seed, white metheglin (honey mead), mirra, aloen, acacia, and gum arabic, each in the amounts specified. Mix them together well."
"All these are ground together in a mortar with wheat flour, then sieved and mixed with water or egg white before administration."
"Method for plastering dislocations and separated bones in their locations, to relieve accidental pain therein and for cracks and fractures: take raw wool and submerge it in sour wine and oil of cypress; then place it on the location."
"It should be noted that this plaster does not have a virtue for restoring fractures or drawing out pus, but rather it serves to relieve pain directly."
"Another method for making plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves, both fresh; mix them together evenly to make the plaster."
"An abbreviated method for plastering to aid in the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remnant of pus: take equal parts of rose leaves, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and barley flour; grind them all together and mix with wine if the member is not scaled."
"But if it is scaled, use that made with wet coriander water or simply water and egg white instead."
"Another method for making plaster that is very strong in resolving abscesses when they occur during the restoration of a member: take equal parts of rose leaves and their seeds, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and wheat bran; grind them all together and mix with water from sauce plants or sweet water or wine, depending on the quality of the member and the appearance of its color."
"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, but rather he recommends a cerate made from wax and oil, not otherwise. And he advises that it should be of medium thickness."
"But it is seen in Galen that they should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, and he lists the causes for which it is used with less heat, such as myrrh, incense, and similar substances, according to those causes that we have recommended."
"Method for making plaster that relieves injury and pain: take myrtle, cypress leaves, human hair shavings or chicken feathers, rose leaves, and salt; mix them all together evenly; grind and sieve them, then mix to make the plaster."
"But the quantity that should remain on the plaster according to how it should be removed and properly loosened is this: if there is no pain or swelling, nor is the bone broken, then do not remove it for several days." "And if severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in that place, then you should remove it immediately or cut it away in that hour and remove the plaster from there."
"And take a cloth and a damp sea sponge, and submerge that in hot water. With it, wash the affected area until the swelling subsides and the pain is calmed. Then let the member rest for an hour. Next, place clean wool soaked in vinegar and oil or sweet oil on it, and leave it there overnight to ensure that the abscess is cauterized and that the inflammation of the member has passed, and that the pain has been relieved."
"And then reapply the plaster gently and in a small amount, not binding too tightly with your first bandage, until it is healed."
"And if it happens that the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all other accidents have been entirely relieved, and you still need plaster and bandaging, then apply it again in the same way as you did at the beginning."
"And if the member does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not remove the plaster until three or four or five or seven days have passed. And sometimes it is left on for twenty days according to how the healing of the member appears, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it."
"And then adjust the bandage more tightly than your first one, and adjust it according to the swelling of the wound, as healing progresses."
"But if you find that the site of the fracture has dried out and wasted more than it should, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with hot water every time you remove it; do this for all three days. And loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation, you will bring nourishment to the member, and it will heal easily."
"But those who foolishly restore a fracture of the member at another time when it has not been set properly from the beginning, and is set incorrectly with crookedness, is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear. And if this were done correctly, the Ancients wrote about it in their books and performed it thus."
"And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
"Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
"The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse. And the causes are different, because some fractures are caused by impact from a blow, which leaves all the bone inside the skull, leaving the bone bare like wood, and this type is called "exulsion." Or the blow cuts off some part of the bone and cuts the flesh around it without penetrating to the inner side of it. This type of fracture is called "avulsion absolute."
"The severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and their cause is percussion with heavy or sharp force."
"This fracture may be penetrating, approaching the panniculus which is attached to the bone, or it may be on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures is either great or slight."
"This fracture is one that is confined within the bone, in its finest capillary subtlety, and for this reason it is called a capillary fracture."
"This fracture occurs from a blow or percussion with heavy force, causing some of the bone's laminae to enter into its interior, similar to what happens to egg shells when they are struck and their insides crack."
"Especially this occurs in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of children's heads."
"And thus all these species of fractures are painful, like separated stars." "I have come to remind you of all this in its proper place."
"And I know all these species of fracture by their detection through the skin and by inquiry with touch and inspection of rotting flesh that is over them."
"The capillary species is recognized by this: it appears on the bone and is wiped clean; then it is touched with the hand, as the fracture looks black."
"But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the accidents of the illness. If there are any accidents that indicate the presence of fear by manifest signs, such as vomiting from cholera, extension and loss of consciousness, sudden loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, dilation of pupils, redness of eyes, and similar accidents in major conditions, then it is not healed."
"But if there are no current accidents, then you may expect recovery, and at that point begin the treatment of it."
"The reason for this is that if it happens to you at the beginning as it happened, and especially during the winter days, then you should study the appearance of the bone before the 14th day according to every condition."
"And if it happens in the summer days, then you should uncover the bone before the seventh day, having ensured that what remains of the bone has been corrupted by the flesh, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur."
"And if the fracture has already reached the flesh covering the brain and is in many small parts and adherent, then you should insert the comminuted and adherent fragments according to what I will tell you."
"And so you should shave the head of the patient and uncover the bone according to your usual custom and manner as best you can, following the shape of the fracture, ensuring that it is light on the patient."
"And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone is difficult, with fluxes of blood or hard abscess, then you should postpone the operation with whatever is necessary, and this is what you should do: apply dressings infused in wine and rose oil to the place, and let the wound rest until the abscess has subsided and you are sure that there is no bleeding; then begin with the circumcision of the bone and the ablation of it."
"And this is according to one of two ways of operating."
"And the first way is that you insert the bone with an incision of such a size using an incision tool; and this is its form:
"And next administer a larger dressing than the second one."
"And you should have various dressings available, some of which are larger than others; some are shorter than others and have sharper edges, made of iron or steel."
"And use them with ease in percussion on the dressing so that you do not strike the head and hurt the patient."
"And if the bone is strong and hard, you should first perforate around it before administering dressings with non-penetrating tweezers."
"And these are not called thus because those do not reach the term of the bone's end where it is appropriate, so that the tweezers have a rounded extremity or margin over that which is left behind the head sharp like a margin or small circle, which should be prevented from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
"And it is convenient for you to take many of these tweezers which fit the thickness of each bone, so that there are enough present in all tests of the brain whose extremities are sharp, and their quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this."
"And this is the shape of three kinds of tweezers:
"Impede the fracture with an incision using scissors, and gently squeeze out as much pus as possible from between each broken bone towards the end of the elevation, as mentioned earlier, until you can radiate or remove the bone with your hand or any other tool suited for this purpose, such as tweezers."
"And make sure that the scissors do not touch any part of the patient's body."
"And then, once you have circled the bone perforation and separated it from the patient if it is continuous with them, you will extract it using a tool similar to scissors but more jagged and sharp than others."
"And if there are any broken small bones and you try to put them back together easily using whatever tools are available, then dress the wound with linen and bandages as mentioned earlier."
"And another way of operating is gentle and far from frightening, which Galen describes and praises highly. This is the method: it is necessary for you to begin by uncovering the bone fracture site as soon as possible and clearly."
"And the lenticular cut is made without cutting anything else, and the acute cut is made on both sides along its length like this: so that the lenticular cut fits tightly against the patient with the sharp face of the bone facing inwards."
"And then strike the scissors of one cut with a small hammer until you have easily cut through all the bone in this way. And be sure that no accident happens to the patient, and if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant, certainly he would be asleep."
"Then if there are any attachments of the soft tissue to the bone in certain places, cut those with the lenticular end of the scissors and remove them easily, for they are removed without harm or fear."
"And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the soft tissue, and what is cut off or scraped from the bone is its surface, which remains rough and with delicate projections, then you must shave off that roughness and remove those projections using fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that you may use them conveniently and correctly according to how you plan your operation on that broken bone and its shape."
"And you must use in your rasping of the bone at the beginning the widest razors, and then immediately use the most subtle ones, and continue doing this until you arrive at using the thinnest and finest of all."
"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must provide care according to what you have planned for their correction."
"And this is not mentioned among all those who have studied that art." "And concerning what has been said, we have shown it in large fractures."
"And if the soft tissue is torn when you are removing the bone, then you must take cloth according to the amount of the wound and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it gently on top of the first cloth without pressing down too hard. Then apply a wide bandage, and do not tie it too tightly but only according to the amount that the wound requires."
"And leave it with this dressing for one or two days until you are sure that there is no suppuration. Then remove the dressing and apply medicines that promote dryness, such as linseed resin and iris flour, powder of incense and of aloe, and similar ones."
"And if you make these medicines into powders that are sprinkled on the wound, they should be dry. In general, apply any medicine that has the property of cleansing and not biting."
"And make sure that the wound in your care is clean and not foul with grease or anything else. Do not let it become infected with virulent matter, for if it does, it will corrupt the soft tissue of the brain and cause illness."
"And if inflammation occurs in the head wound, especially after the bone has been scraped and when care is not taken, it will appear black on its surface. Then consider that you have caused the harmful accidents mentioned earlier, and know that they are fatal without doubt."
"If there is no blackness but only from the medicine applied on top, then it is the virtue of that medicine which causes the blackness. Therefore, take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together with a cloth, and apply it to the inflammation. Then treat it according to the usual methods of care until it heals."
"Chapter 3"
"On the restoration of the nose when it is crushed."
"You should know that the nose is not broken except by two parts being crushed together and pushed upwards, or one of those parts being displaced. This happens because there are two bones in the nose, the left one being made of cartilage and not broken, but rather becoming bruised and distorted."
If one of the patient's limbs is broken, then you should insert the little finger into its socket and immobilize that fracture using your thumb and index finger from within, and your palm externally, until it returns to its natural shape. And do this carefully, ensuring you don't hurt the patient during this procedure.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nostril and your finger cannot reach it, then use the tip of a small stick instead.
If the fracture involves both parts, proceed as follows:
Try to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait seven or nine days for the swelling to subside before doing so.
And insert a cloth wick into the nostril tip if the fracture involves one part, or two cotton pads if it involves both parts, ensuring that they are thick enough to fill the nasal passage.
Some ancient surgeons claim that cotton pads should be bandaged at the edges and changed daily, but I do not find this necessary. Instead, wrap the wick in a thin layer of album made from egg white mixed with powdered myrrh; leave it in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage has regained its strength.
Sometimes, instead of cotton pads, a linen cloth folded into the shape of a cone may be inserted into the nostril to prevent any accumulation of pus within it. This can be done even if the nasal fracture is severe and the patient has difficulty breathing through their nose.
You don't need to do this; if you wish, you may use the linen cloth instead of cotton pads, but it is not necessary.
And if another abscess forms later on, apply a plaster made of wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or diacylon.
But if an abscess does not form, you should then plaster the outside of it with ground sesame seeds and powdered myrrh mixed with egg white. Place a linen strip over this plaster, and do not manipulate the nose in any way.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are merely comminuted, you should then cut over them and extract those fragments using appropriate instruments. Then suture the wound and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, along with suitable plasters.
And if a deformity occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it using cotton pads and lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture does not heal properly, examine whether the fracture is displaced only on one side and not completely shattered or bent inward.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and similarly for the left mandible. Then gently push the fracture inward with this finger while supporting it from outside with your other hand.
If the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to reduce the fracture.
If teeth are displaced or loosened due to the fracture, then strengthen those that you expect may break with gold, silver, or silk thread. Apply pressure gently on the broken jawbone using cotton pads and then place a folded towel, a piece of gauze, or a sandbag along the length of the jawbone to maintain its position until reduction is achieved without causing further damage.
Tell the patient to rest and avoid activities that require excessive jaw movement for a while, especially eating hard or chewy foods.
If you notice any changes in the patient's appearance at any time after reduction and fixation of the fracture, remove the splint on the third day. Then examine the area for any signs of infection or other complications, remove any remaining cotton, and apply a dressing using powdered borax, egg albumen, or flour to promote healing, followed by a bandage.
Once the dressing and splint are applied correctly without altering the position of the bone, leave them in place until healing is complete and the fracture is stable. Often, these fractures heal within three weeks.
If an abscess forms later on, follow these steps until it heals and is drained:
"If the fracture is in a visible place, then consider if it's a separation of bone fragments or shattered pieces. Then subtly remove those shattered pieces with whatever tools are appropriate for their removal."
"If the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it using the forceps according to your need."
"And when you have removed those shattered pieces and there is no more left to remove, then if the opening of the wound is wide enough, proceed with your treatment. But if not, apply one of the plasters that are appropriate for this purpose and cover it until it heals."
"Chapter Five."
"On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured."
"The clavicle is often broken at its middle third, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways:"
"Either the clavicle is broken into two separate pieces with no shattered fragments, which is easy to restore; or it is separated in such a way that there are shattered fragments, which makes restoration difficult; or the fracture occurs with an open wound."
"And the operation in this case, when the fracture is closed, is that you have two assistants present, one to hold the retractor and follow the broken clavicle, and the other to extend the patient's neck at that location."
"And once you have exposed the fracture with the said tongs, make sure that the bone ends fit together properly according to their original shape, without any prominence or concavity."
"And if you need more extension, then you should place a wad of cloth or wool behind the patient's shoulder to support it, according to how much is needed. Then extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the wad with your hand until the fracture is properly reduced."
"And if you cannot bring the end of the clavicle back into its proper position because it has become shortened, then have the patient sit up on their shoulders and place a pillow or cushion under their upper chest."
"And the assistant presses on the muscle at that location while you elevate the clavicle until it is in its proper position. Then you can reduce the fracture and secure it with the said tongs."
"But if there are any sharp edges or spikes on the clavicle, you should cut them off and remove them carefully."
"And if the clavicle is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision through it using one of the scalpel blades that you have prepared for this purpose. You had previously placed a retractor on the clavicle to expose the instruments, which are made of wood or iron and have this shape:"
"It is shaped like a spatula with this concavity. Its width should be according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or its thinness."
"But its length should be as short as possible for the operation, with two ends like this: one end is wide and the other is narrow."
"But if the disruption of the wound that you made when removing the spike from the bone is large and likely to form a hematoma, then close the wound edges with sutures."
"But if the disruption is small or you fear a hematoma, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound."
"And if a hematoma forms, then soak a cloth in sour wine and rose oil and apply it over that area."
"And all of this is done while avoiding putting pressure on the fractured bone. And you should see the patient every day to ensure that the bandage does not become loose or slip off as the swelling decreases. If it does, then correct it and tighten the bandage."
"And also make the patient sleep on their back with a small pillow placed at their side at night. This will elevate the adjutors of their shoulder and thus elevate the fracture of the clavicle and reduce strain on the muscles, or keep the arm bound to their chest."
"And do not remove the bandage until about twelve days have passed unless there is persistent redness or an abscess in that location."
"And also renew the plaster if you see that its face is dry by then, and adjust it to fit the swelling, restore it, and leave it in place until the fracture of the clavicle has healed and united."
"And healing is usually achieved within twenty-eight days, although sometimes it may take less time in certain individuals."
"Chapter VI"
"On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder."
"A fracture of the scapula usually occurs on its lateral border and does not affect the body of the bone but only the margins."
"When the fracture is located on the medial border of the scapula and not visible except by touch, then prepare the reduction according to its shape and reduce it naturally in every way that you are able."
"And then apply plaster made of fine powdered millstone with egg albumen and linen cloth. Then apply powder made of folded cloth. Then apply a thin bandage around the entire scapula or somewhat wider."
"But if the bandage is concave at some point on the scapula, then fill in that concavity with linen cloth and smooth out the bandage evenly."
"And also secure it above with a long wad of cotton that is gently compressed and ensure that the bandage does not slip from its proper location."
"Check the bandage every day. If it becomes loose at any time, replace it and tighten it again to ensure that the bandage does not slip from its proper location."
"And make the patient lie on their side."
"The scapula is usually restored in twenty days or less."
"And when this number of days is completed, then remove the bandage, and be sure that you know how to distinguish which bones have solid union without removal."
"And if you are treating a fracture of the humerus and placing it at the side of the elbow, then split it open there and follow what was said regarding the reduction of a hematoma in the clavicle fracture if one occurs here."
"Chapter VII"
"Regarding the healing of a broken foot."
"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this can be difficult to heal; but its ends usually grow back together, although they are shortened and fragmented."
"And when the middle of the foot breaks, it declines towards its parts inside and accidents can happen to it with great pain, difficulty in healing, coughing, fever, vomiting blood; and there is an obvious deformity in the cavity of the broken bone which cannot be hidden from touch."
"And for its healing, the patient should be placed on their back, and a pillow should be placed between the soles of their feet; gently press on the muscles of the foot, adjust the bones with two hands, carefully operate and equalize according to any possible manner that is appropriate and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns to its proper position."
"And gently apply plaster and gauze, then place on a thin table board of sauce or chalk and its likes in levitation, since you wrap that up with cloth; carefully apply it onto the broken bone so as not to move it; sometimes tie it around the back according to the roundness, and tighten it with appropriate strapping; regularly check the bandage, and when softened, tighten it again."
"And if there is a need for removal of the bandage due to corruption or inflammation, pain, or an abscess occurring in that place, you should remove and untie it immediately, remove the plaster, correct what has happened with the manner of curing it; and apply plaster again if necessary, sometimes changing its face; adjust the strapping until it is healed."
Capítulo VIII
Chapter VIII
Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large spaces that are on the back, and at the ends of those bones near their joints it happens only rarely because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of him is not concealed from His perception despite His inquiry with them.
And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture according to your knowledge with the possible manner, so that it can heal according to need. Afterwards apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary.
And if the rib fracture extends to its inner partitions, then severe pain and piercing are experienced by the patient, similar to that which is felt by someone who has cried. This happens because the bone pierces the pleura. Difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood also occurs, making it difficult to treat.
And even the Ancients were skilled in treating that with many techniques.
And they said this: it is necessary to withhold food from the patient who has caused inflammation and flatulence, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, pushing the fracture towards its outer partitions.
But we should not do this because it could easily cause an internal abscess if not done carefully. And if one has already occurred, then it can help with that too.
And some of them said that one should suspend wind and then suck it with force; this is similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that the wind might drive the excess fluids to the site due to weakness.
And some of them said: the location should be covered with wool that has been immersed in warm oil, and fine powders should be inserted between the ribs until it is filled. Then, wrap it according to its roundness like a bandage. And treat the patient with pleurisy remedies and medicine.
"If the patient's severe constriction cannot be endured and the bone pierces the membrane with a sharp point, then fear for the patient; therefore we should cut upon that place, break open the shattered rib, and immediately place over that instrument which preserves the circle of remembrance, previously mentioned, and insert the bone gently, extracting that."
"If we need to adjust both lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and heal it with plasters until it is healed."
"If an abscess occurs inside the wound, then cover it and press powder made from rose oil onto the location, until the wound is healed as necessary for an internal abscess."
"And let him be propped up on pillows while he lies upon the bed until he is healed."
Chapter ix.
"Concerning the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck."
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they sometimes become inflamed, likewise those of the spine. And if it happens to someone and you want to know whether they will be cured or not, then consider this: if sometimes their muscles are already softened and stunned and dead, so that those cannot move nor extend nor shrink those anymore, and when you press those with your fingers or prick those with a needle and do not feel pain in those, then you shall know that it is not healed, and such conditions are mortal.
And if those can move and feel constraint with your fingers and prick there, then you shall know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the illness will recover with treatment.
And if it seems similar in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their weight.
Then if you find that they are already softened like those above, then it has happened to these what has happened to the muscles, and especially when lying on his back, he feels vertigo and evacuation without his will, and sometimes he is suddenly overturned on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you shall know that it is mortal, and at that point do not bother with its treatment.
But if none of those things happen to him, the cause is better and easier to treat.
And the treatment of it is that you pierce into the sedative place of the hard abscess which lies over the injured spine on the right side, or with the mouth of a pouch apply heat there: lie over that several times a day until it is softened the hard abscess.
And then apply one of the comforting and dispersing plasters there, and strengthen it with a bandage. And command to the patient that he use rest and tranquility and do not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it is healed.
"If an accident occurs due to a bone fracture or any other cause that has separated it, then you must cut above the elbow and remove that bone. Then immediately stitch the two edges of the wound with sutures if it is large; then treat it with some ointment from herbs until it heals."
"If the tip of the bone is broken and it's the end of the joint, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus and gently press on the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the appropriate position; then apply a plaster or bandage if necessary, and then straighten that."
"If you feel something broken inside, then go over there, remove it, and treat the wound with appropriate care until it heals."
Chapter .x
Of the Restoration of Health
"The bones of the arms are sometimes broken and when they break, the fracture is usually located at the ends of those bones and extends along their length towards the interior. In addition to pain in that location and puncture wounds, numbness occurs if it's a fracture."
"And the restoration of this is done by extending your hand over that area until it covers the fracture as shown in the figure."
"And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should gently press on that area until it aligns with its natural shape according to your judgment."
"But if the fracture is in the middle or has already shifted towards the interior, then place the patient on their back to prepare for the restoration of that fracture." "And once you've aligned it, apply a plaster and also apply traction using a splint made of wood or metal, being careful not to cause puncture wounds or displacement of the fracture."
"And align the concave surface and press it until it takes on traction according to equality. Then have the patient sleep on their back or side."
"But if an abscess forms later, then stop the extension and restoration until the abscess is drained. Then apply what is needed to drain that according to what has been said earlier; and return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as necessary."
"And if this happens in the leg bones or they are crushed, then remove them."
"Chapter eleven."
"Regarding the treatment of a broken bone."
"The collarbone, which is between the chest and the head of the shoulder."
"And if it is broken, its treatment can be approached in one of two ways. The first way is to take a piece of wood..."
"and attach two bandages at both ends; it should then be suspended from an elevated place."
"The patient should sit on a chair, then place their broken arm over the board so that its tip reaches the middle point where the curvature of the board is attached."
"Then suspend something heavy from that [point] or the nurse can gently pull it towards the sides. And then the physician will align the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns to its original position."
"The other way is for the patient to lie on their back and suspend their arm with a bandage. Then command two nurses: one should hold what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other should hold the part below it. Each of them should gently pull at their respective ends."
"And if you want to increase the traction force, then place another bandage over the fracture and another one above it. Then each of the two nurses should pull at their respective ends."
"If the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place half of the bandage on the tip and the other half below the fracture near the elbow."
"And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then place the bandage over that location and also over the elbow."
"Once it is properly aligned and secured without causing distress, then wait for it to be set according to what is necessary and applied well. Then gently stretch it so that there is no heat buildup."
"But if there is heat buildup, then leave the splint on for seven days. Then remove it and apply a clean cloth soaked in warm water and rose oil over where the heat buildup occurred until it subsides. Then gently stretch it."
"The way to gently stretch it is to apply a plaster cast over the fracture. Then place a layer of linen cloth soaked in new wine and oil over the plaster cast. Then adjust the arm using that support and place their hand, covered with a cloth, on top of their muscle."
"And then tie the cloth and gently stretch it over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a straight position, unless prohibited by any reason related to the broken bone."
"And then apply splints."
"And place on the fracture that splint which is widest and strongest among the others. Place it between each finger width apart, and let its length be according to the break with an additional three fingers' width on either side."
"And then apply traction using the splint with the bandage mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And ensure that your traction is applied as closely to the fracture site as possible." "And as the fracture heals, gradually decrease the traction."
"Therefore, if you wish to remove the splints and traction as described in the time when restoring the limb to its original position, then do so."
"And if you fear heat buildup, leave the traction and splints on for seven days, as mentioned earlier."
"Also consider the limb in all cases for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs there due to excess pressure from the splint. If necessary, reduce or adjust the diet as prescribed by your physician."
"But if you feel confident that nothing will happen from this, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more."
"And let their sleep be on their back with their arms over their stomach."
"And place a full pillow of wool at the elbow and constantly monitor day and night that the figure of the broken limb does not dislocate or become softened. If it does, then adjust accordingly with your skill."
"And feed the patient according to the order given earlier, ensuring that their food is soft at first until they begin to heal. Then gradually increase the thickness of their food."
"The custom is that the splint and its cloth are strengthened for forty days. Then they should be removed, a bath administered, and the area treated with ointments that will correct it."
"And if the fracture is healed completely, then do not remove the splint and splints for one day or two months."
"Chapter XII."
"On the restoration of broken arms."
"The arm is composed of two bones called 'two forks.' One is small and is located near the thumb, while the other is large and extends from the little finger's side."
"Either the larger fork bone alone can break or both bones together."
"And when the small fork bone is broken at its upper end, then its restoration and healing will be easier."
"But when it is broken near its lower end, the fracture is bad and its healing difficult."
"And worse still is when both bones are broken together."
"Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fork bone at its upper end, then it is necessary for the physician to restore it with ease by using a small extension until it is healed."
"But if it is the large fork bone that is broken, then a stronger extension must be used."
"And if both bones are broken together, then traction must be applied very strongly."
"And the figure of the hand must be restored and its extension laid out on a pillow with the palm upwards, placing the thumb highest among all the fingers, the little finger lowest, and the patient centered on a cushioned chair."
"And place a pillow in front of him at his height or slightly below it, so that he does not have to struggle."
"Then one assistant should extend the arm from its lower part with their hand or a bandage, while another extends it upwards in the same manner."
"And then the physician should heal the bone until they have reduced it to the best figure possible."
"If there is any displacement in the fracture of the bone, then forcefully reduce it back into its proper place with your skill."
"If a separated fragment appears that prevents the elbow from extending and you have no hope of restoring it, then perform the procedure described earlier to fix it."
"But if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already dealt with that in Chapter X. Therefore, take care of it accordingly."
"And if heat buildup occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then lay a cloth soaked in cerote made from rose oil and white wax over it. The cloth should be neither too thick nor too thin. Then apply gentle pressure with another cloth until the heat subsides. Remove the cerote and apply an emplaster prepared from powdered mallow with clay of eggs and honey. Then apply splints; the splint that is placed over the fracture should be broad and strong."
"You should know that the number of splints for the arm varies depending on the situation, whether it is a fracture in one bone or both bones together."
"Then apply pressure over the site of the fracture very strongly and forcefully. If the extension is directed towards the upper part of the fracture or its lower part, then apply gentle pressure afterwards according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"Let the cloths wrapped around the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough. Let the thread with which it is sewn be neither too fine nor too thick, as we have recommended."
"And consider the limb and its condition after several days." "And if any cause arises requiring correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you should apply cold water compresses until that swelling subsides."
"And let the limb rest without constraint until it regains its usual position."
"And once the inflammation has subsided and the bone is aligned properly, then adjust everything with your skill."
"And also consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction; then you should gently relax it slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows freely again."
"But if no such cause arises as those we have mentioned, then it should not be released within about twenty days or so."
"And then let the patient's arm be suspended by its usual means of movement for a few days, and have him lie on his back to sleep."
"And know that this fracture is usually restored in thirty days or sometimes even thirty-two days, but it could also be restored in twenty-eight days, depending on the individual's constitution and the power of their nature."
Chapter XIII
On the restoration of fractures of the fingers and toes.
"Know that in the case of fractures of the fingers or toes, they rarely happen without some injury to them."
"And when such fracture or injury happens to the hand, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back with his head elevated according to equality, and gently suspend the injured arm above him while extended."
"And then the attendant should extend the broken bones and the physician should bind them together so that they are well aligned with good approximation."
"And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless there is an abscess that requires cauterization. Then also apply a splint above according to the size of the location, with that already wrapped in linen."
"But if the fracture is in the middle of the palm near the belly of the hand, then make a similar splint of linen and command the patient to hold it with his palm clasped. Then also secure it with a long strip of linen."
"And let the splint be made of leather covered with linen and elevated so that the leather is applied to the palm. Then secure it according to what is necessary."
"But if the fracture is at the outside of the hand, then it is necessary to apply a splint above and another splint from the little finger side in the palm so that the hand is elevated and straight. Then also apply the bandage as when wrapping around the wrist."
"And if there is a fracture of one of the toes of the foot, then it should be aligned as necessary and then secured with the sole of the foot. And if you wish, apply a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in other toes, such as in the middle toe or the index toe, the ring toe, or the little toe, then it should be aligned and tied with the string of the corresponding toe; or all the toes may be tied together continuously, which is better; or a small splint may be applied to it, as we have said for the big toe."
"And consider, in the restoration of these fractures, and particularly that one, the condition of any abscess formation or opposition that may occur during your operation. Act accordingly when any such cause arises, as described above."
"Chapter Fourteen."
"Of the Reduction of Fractures of the Tibia."
The hip bone of the thigh often breaks and is declared apparent in sensation as it turns to the front and upwards.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament strengthens over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is prone on their stomach and face.
And moreover, the surgeon stretches all the ligaments to their destination according to their nature when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it extends to the thigh's ridge, then the ligament attached to the tendon should be pulled towards the front of the knee, so that the tension takes place there, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
And likewise if the fracture is close to the knee, then it should be done with the ligament attached to the tendon, and its tension should be applied from below.
And moreover the doctor brings the bone together with both of its ends until it reduces according to its natural form and the bone is joined by good union; then it is necessary to apply plaster and compression, otherwise gangrene may occur in the member. But if gangrene occurs, then you should leave it for some days until the gangrene has dried up and then return to your treatment.
The compression should be done thus: first, wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches the ankle and thigh ridge.
And insert a long splint between the thigh and the bandage near the knee below, bringing the ends of the splint from above on both sides, then wrap it around the bandage and thigh with what remains of the bandage.
And then place a pad over the thigh at that fracture point, and place one stake on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft rags to keep the compression in place.
Then begin with strong compression from the middle over the fracture point with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, gradually reduce the compression, making it less strong and more flexible.
Then extend both ends of the splint below to reach the ankle bone, and tighten both ends of the other stake on that side to ensure that the ligament does not slip from its position.
Then leave the compression in place with this caution: ensure that there is no injury to the limb, nor gangrene or blisters, nor inflammation or swelling similar to these; and if any of these occur, then carefully remove it and correct whatever has happened immediately, as we have said many times before.
But if the bone sticks out where it was broken, then you should smooth it off as much as possible; and if not, file it down and remove it, and treat with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the thighbone may become tighter than the stakes used for it, as we have said in the case of the elbow and arm.
But nevertheless in the restoration of the limb in this way there should not occur a limp or limping gait. And if it is restored alone without applying the other thighbone, then that leg will always limp.
"Know that the illness can last for 40 days or slightly more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
"Chapter XV."
"On the reduction of a tooth fracture."
"You should know that fractures of the tooth crown rarely occur, but they can happen due to strong blows or trauma."
"However, if a fracture does occur, it is usually just a crack or break in its parts, which amounts to very little or somewhat more, and all this is done with caution."
"And the restoration of it is easy, so that what is broken of its parts may be joined together with the said glue and congealed according to what is possible for equality, facility, and manufacture."
"And also apply a plaster and bandage over that round tooth if necessary, and strengthen it with a suitable strapping."
"And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended for other fractures, such as pus cautery and similar things, so that everything may be applied according to whatever is convenient for it, so that it may heal."
"Chapter XVI."
"On the restoration of a broken arch (crown)."
"Know this: in the hip joint are two bones, one large and named for its resemblance to a chamber, the other subtle and called the trochanter."
"And concerning the various types of fractures that can occur to the two bones of the arm, restoration is made just as it is with dislocation of the arm, and its operation is one."
"And if two bones are crushed at once, the joint becomes completely separated."
"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the joint remains somewhat displaced."
"And if the larger bone is broken alone, it causes immediate paralysis, which is one of the causes that are not amendable."
"And appropriate extension and equination and ligamentation of the fragments should be applied according to that dislocation."
"But nevertheless, if a fracture of the joint is displaced having many fragments, care should be taken to make the extension gentle and lighter, and aided by your virtue."
"And in case of operation on the joint of the arm, this is when you dislocate the fragments and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from pine that are prepared beforehand for those causes which are placed below, and they should be made equally of branches of palm; choose those that are slender, not thick ones, and their length according to the length of the joint, and place them from the front to behind."
"And appropriately wrap around each splint in two layers according to its length, and place one on the fracture of the joint on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be placed from front to back on the thigh of the leg."
"And appropriately fasten the two splints in three places on both extremities and in the middle, for with this arrangement the joint is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains in good position."
"And now a splint of wood according to the length of the joint has been applied; and the joint should be placed upon it so that it retains some movement."
"But particularly when you do this in fractures, especially when there is proper alignment."
"And appropriately examine the joint every day and study it carefully to ensure that you guard against inflammation or infection or other similar causes. And if any of these occurs, then you should apply what is necessary in order for it to be healed."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot."
"No ankle fracture happened at all; sometimes fractures happen on the foot bones; few foot toes have fractures happening, and they don't cause any trouble in their position."
"And if the foot bones have fractures and those bones are sometimes elevated above each other, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared in such a way as to walk."
"And he presses one foot onto what is elevated by those bones, and presses on them, squeezing and twisting around the joints."
"And then they apply plaster and bandages on top of it, and place a small board with two flat heads on the front of the foot."
"And then they strengthen that bandage with downward traction, because you have wrapped it around with cloth and other causes as needed."
"And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, because you will find the bones twisted together, either crushed or displaced, and the operation on them is performed in this way:
"If some teeth are clenched, then restore those, align them thus with glue and stitch them back into place as I have shown you in the restoration of these hands." "And then apply pressure on the bitten finger according to its length, and place it slightly lower than this table that I have shown you earlier, and stretch it with moderate tension."
"But if what is bitten of the bones are two or three or more, then you apply pressure on each finger according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, stretch the table towards the bottom of the foot, and stand it upright so that one of its ends rests on the belly of the foot for better retention."
"And remember not to forget that you should not consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents, and apply what is necessary according to each accident."
Chapter xviii
On the fracture of the hip bone of a woman and the pubic bone and penis bone of a man.
When the hip bone of a woman is fractured, then make that cease in this way: wrap it in a bandage, incline it at the junction of both sides slightly, and hold it behind.
And moreover the midwife presses the hip bone from behind, and it is done on the hip bone in this way as I have said earlier; and also the woman is tilted backwards, and raises her buttocks little by little, for all this is forgotten until it is before the junction of the hip bones as I have said earlier and the fractured bone returns.
And moreover powder is applied on the buttocks, and when she wants to urinate, she moves her hip with ease and then urinates, and reduces and returns it according to the manner in which she placed it at the beginning, and again applies the first powder.
And do this for seven days or so until that is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and stretch it over the fracture of the hip with a reed pipe; and insert all the bladder into the hip bone, and blow through the reed pipe with force until the bladder is inflated within the hip bone, for the fracture returns.
And moreover it should be wrapped in cotton and kept for some days according to what we have recommended until it is healed.
And when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, then for its restoration and splinting, do what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is true is not hidden in these fractures near the groin which cause little inconvenience, especially to that person who has some study and use and understands this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest positions how truly it can be restored and reduced, and therefore understand well.
But in the case of a fractured penis of a man, take a guarguamela (a type of bandage) made of wool, and put it around the penis; and then apply over it a wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and then let it lie for three days or so until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are out of place.
"It is suitable for one who has suffered a fracture with profuse bleeding, especially if the bone is large, such as those in the thigh or arm. Quickly perform phlebotomy if the conditions are favorable."
"If the bleeding is profuse and red, then you must use retention to prevent it from flowing further. If there are other causes, treat those as well."
"Therefore begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this if no inflammation occurs."
"But if inflammation occurs, then delay the reduction until the seventh day, allowing the inflammation to subside. Do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause harm."
"But if the bone sticks out above the skin, then you should perform reduction with ease and minimal traction."
"But if you are not prepared for traction and cannot reduce it with your hands alone, then use this instrument. It is made of iron, with a length of seven or eight digits and a width according to the amount of bleeding. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these on hand, according to what is needed in all types of fractures."
"And once it is reduced, apply a splint with gentle compression to prevent it from becoming displaced during the operation."
"And if the extremity is sharp and has a border on its sides, then its upper part should be thicker than its lower part, and its middle should have a greater thickness."
"This is how it looks:"
"And it is called in Greek 'Labre Volentz Atelarem', which means roughly 'stone of pain'."
"Why must the end of the limb be raised above the prominence of the bone?"
"And pull it back in such a way that the bone returns to its place, and is covered with some padding."
"And then force the ends of the fracture to come together, and if one end is too thin to grasp with the instrument, it is necessary for you to insert a small instrument between them so that it can grasp onto that bone."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended here, then cut it with whatever tool you have available among those that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever way seems most feasible to you."
"And also scrape away any roughness and small splinters remaining on the bone."
"And when the bone is reduced and during its reduction the patient feels very severe pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this, so that you may give great relief to the patient."
"When your restoration of the bone is complete, then wrap it in a cloth soaked in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer time, and do not let any oil or other substance come into contact with it, so that putrefaction and corruption may not occur later."
"And also administer bandages at the time of completion of the bone restoration, and leave the dressing uncovered in such a way that you may insert the splint with forceps and use wrappings according to the quantity of the dressing."
"And be very careful that you do not stretch the dressing over the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or corrupting illness or swelling in their patients, which is not good." "And if your bandage is light, soft, and different from the bandages of other fractures."
"And if the dressing is large or is a bad dressing, and you fear that some of those unfortunate accidents which we have mentioned may occur on it, and you find pain in that place, then do not rely on bandages, but make a wrapping of hard cloths there instead of bandages and stretch it with them."
"And when after one or two days the dressing begins to grow warm in that place, then you remove from there the cloth which you had put on it with wine, and apply cataplasms, such as those by which we usually treat dressings, like a cataplasm of treacle and similar ones."
"And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the dressing every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and the member should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction may flow from there to the parts below with ease."
"If many days pass and the dressing is not consolidated nor separated from the warmth, then you should know that here are the beginnings of gangrene, therefore you must examine the dressing with caution." "And those gangrenous parts which are separated and removed you should cut away, but those which are not separated and cause the member to swell and cause pain, you should pierce according to what is possible for you."
"And if something like chyme or ichor occurs in the dressing, then it is stoimenia or some other species of corruption and putrefaction, therefore you should apply one of those which are mentioned here in its chapter regarding the cure of that."
"And regarding that in which I should speak better and you make your own judgment: when the bone is crushed, do not presume traction of it, nor extraction of it because many times death has occurred because of this; let putrefaction take its course there, for strong flux will come by itself after about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the dressing if you can see it, and if not leave it alone."
"Chapter XX."
"On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the region of some fracture."
Many times this condition occurs during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints. It is identified by the distortion of the limb's shape. And it often prevents the limb from its natural operation.
Then consider whether the swelling is recent and administer those medications that have astringent properties like aloevera, ensens, myrrh, and acacia. Use them generously and mix them with either egg albumen, white vinegar or sour wine. Then place this mixture over the swelling wrapped in linen, applying pressure with a firm bandage.
And let the bandage remain in place for several days without removing it; and gradually remove it when the swelling has subsided. Or apply over it a lead plate descended from above because lead has the property to reduce all inflammation in limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into bone and is causing pain, then it must be cut open carefully, and make an incision along the natural crease of the limb, excising any excess flesh or bony protuberance. Then rinse it with warm water until it is healed. And dress it accordingly until it is completely healed.
Chapter XXI
On the restoration of fractures when they are healed, but if the limb remains weak and does not align naturally
When a bone fracture has healed, but the limb remains weak and crooked, it is usually due to one of several causes: either too much dissolution of the ligaments and tissues around the fracture site so that they do not heal properly; or excess tightening of the ligaments preventing adequate nourishment from reaching the limb; or too much embrocation applied to the area; or excessive movement before the bone has fully healed; or lack of blood circulation in the body due to weakness or debility.
And the treatment for this is to ensure the patient receives proper nutrition in order to increase blood circulation and strengthen their body. Apply warm baths, and massage gently with gentle movements to stimulate healing and promote alignment of the limb.
And apply gentle traction to the limb using a splint in order to draw more nourishment to it. Or continue applying warm compresses with hot water to promote healing and restore alignment to its natural state.
Chapter XXII
"Regarding the treatment of crushed bones when they have been restored crookedly, prohibit their operation in such manner."
"When it happens to a member already restored near its healing time from being twisted and prominent at the crushed bone's nodule, although the member is not fededa in shape but still allows its natural operation, you should not receive the word of anyone who asserts that such member is newly crushed."
"But already many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be blamed for it brings great fear along with its mortal sign."
"But if the limpness and nodule are recent, then they should be wrapped in warm water with softening herbs such as marshmallow roots and rosemary leaves, mallows, and similar ones; and a plaster of mollifying ointment should be made thus with dill well-made, or mucilage of marshmallow root should be pressed with grease of goose or oil of cypress and applied therewith; or fatty figs should be pressed with pigeon's dung and similar to those medicines called amulets for consolidation."
"And sometimes they are dissolved with frequent gentle friction that should be done with the moistest ones, and then the member should be moved in all parts at every hour."
"But if the twistedness is already advanced and has become hard and converted into bone, and there is necessity for its cure with iron, then it should be cut away from above and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and what is superfluous of the nodule of that member with the bone should be cut away with subtle scissors, and facilitation should be administered in that one with care and study."
Chapter XXIII
Of speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints of the body, which causes restricted movement and deformity of the limb, resulting in great pain and injury.
Therefore when some dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly reduce it, and not delay its reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And therefore it should not be moved nor stretched at the time of inflammation, for many times it causes spasm and intense pain.
But when this occurs, it is necessary that you quickly apply a poultice to the affected area and allow it to rest until the inflammation has subsided. Then the limb should be wrapped with hot water and oil, and gently reduced.
And all members should be treated with that of which the memory comes into its place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what has been said about fractures, from the most elevated part of the body down to the most inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
"Treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
"If both jaws are dislocated, they must be reduced; the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they have been moved slightly from their sockets and softened a little; or they have been completely dislocated, so that they are mollified at the point of articulation, when saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot open nor close his mouth, with his tongue wrapped in his cheek."
"When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place on its own without any cause."
"If the dislocation is complete and full, it is necessary that reduction be administered gently, and not delayed at all."
"And let the minister hold the patient's head, and insert his thumb or both thumbs into the jaw joint inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and keep the other fingers outside with which he engages; and command the patient to close his jaws and stop them from moving from each part; and the doctor gently pushes the jaw back into its place."
"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at once, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered, so that the reduction may be made more easily and not delayed at all, as we have said."
"And then when the reduction has been made and the jaws have been closed, and the patient's mouth is not softened, powdered cloth with wax should be placed over it, which is made of wax and rose oil; and let it be tied gently with soft linen."
"And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be supported between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left; and do not force him to swallow anything at first; but let his food be liquid gruel, until when the pains have subsided and the jaws are healed, then let him eat what he wishes."
"And this should be administered gently, and not worked upon the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking and laughing, until the jaw is healed."
"And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then often vomiting occurs with fever and continuous thirst, and sometimes the abdomen of the patient becomes swollen, and there may also be pure colic."
"And when this happens, then know that it is a fatal condition; and often the patient dies within ten days."
"Chapter XXV."
"On the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and its extremity."
"The furcula is not dislocated from the inside due to its connection with the chest wall; however, sometimes it may be dislocated externally, which can be felt."
"The restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms." Then press the area with your palm using firm pressure, for it will return.
Then pause over that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
If the end of that which seizes the vein does not continue with it, then it is not displaced in any way; therefore it is necessary to reduce and align it according to what we have said and according to what you have prepared.
Then pause over that plaster, powders, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
With this treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter xxvi
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the titillation on the left side.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning above the muscle, and that is rare; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and exits at the left parts above the titillation, and more easily in those of whom the flesh is little, but in those with much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
And sometimes, especially for some men struck by blow or fall, the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable abscess, and it is crushed by that which is already dislocated.
Therefore, you should proceed in this manner until you are sure about it, and afterwards proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the left parts above the titillation; for this reason you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because there is a manifest diversity between them. You find in the head of the muscle a concavity on the left side of the titillation, and you touch the head of the muscle like this, as if it were a goose egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move that at all by any movement.
If it is dislocated below or above, and you afterwards find a manifest touch, it will not be hidden.
And from this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
"To reduce it, the minister raises the patient's hand above their head. Then place your feet on either side of the patient's genitals. Next, raise the joint with strength to its original position, and then the minister raises the patient's arm and extends it upwards."
"If it does not return (the limb), then, from the beginning when the dislocation occurred, several days or even hours may have passed. Therefore, the patient should be bathed in warm water and rubbed with an ointment that is moisturizing and soothing, such as one made from ground aloe vera, fenugreek seeds, and marsh mallow root in water."
"And then the patient should be propped up on their back and placed on either side of the testicles waiting for it to regain its normal position between elevated and constricted. And then the doctor places his foot on the sphere (a ball or globe) and lifts the head of the muscle with force, pulling the patient's arm so that it is not moved from its position. Another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved from its place as the limb soon returns to its proper location."
"And if you wish, you can reduce it in this manner: have a man present who is taller than the patient. He should stand on the side of the limb that is longer and insert his muscle between the patient's testicles and elevate them upwards while the patient is suspended in air. Another assistant should pull the patient's arm down towards their belly." "But if the patient is lighter, it is necessary that they are suspended by something else (besides their arm), otherwise the dislocation will quickly return."
"And it can be reduced in the same way: place on the ground a long pole with a round head like a pestle that is not too thick or thin. Then place the patient on top of it. Cover the top of the pole with soft cloths and have the patient stand along the length of the pole, stretching their arm out to the other side. Stretch the body on the other side with force because the joint will quickly return to its proper location."
"And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned above, then use this treatment: take a pole that is two arms' length long and four fingers wide. The thickness of it should be equal to the length of the thumb and place it between the testicles in this way:"
"And then place soft cloths on top of the round head of the pole so that it does not hurt the patient."
"And then place the pole on top of the patient's testicles. Extend their arm or leg over the pole towards the other side and bind the pole to the assistant's arms and the end of the extended limb."
"And then place the arm on a ladder according to its width. Extend the hand towards the other side and suspend the other body on the other side because the joint will soon enter."
"And when the joint is fully reduced according to any possible method, then place a pad made of wool of equal quantity over the testicles. Then apply a plaster prepared from powdered millet with honey and egg whites all over the muscle as it is turned upwards. Then bind it decently around the testicles. Wrap the bandage over the plaster and tie the patient's hand to their neck, leaving it untied for seven days without moving their arm."
"And the patient should be given little food until the limb is strengthened because it will then be easier to heal."
"And then give more food after seven or eight days and have the limb exercised. And when it is firm and not softened, then it is healed."
"But if the joint is frequently dislocated due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then cauterization should be administered with three incisions as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
"And even if all of that is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not firm, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times but it is still not firm and caught and cannot raise that arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the muscle have been injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its proper place."
"Regarding the dislocation of that [the elbow], it occurs in the pit of the arm and the nipple or behind the shoulder blade. The reduction is done with pressure and extension using the hands until it returns."
"And apply another bandage to it [the elbow] and treat it until it heals."
"And if gravity occurs in the limb and slowness of movement during its healing, then the patient should use baths frequently until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
"You should know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and one that is dislocated cannot be reduced without great pain, especially if it is dislocated in front or behind. The dislocation of the hip is not noticeable until the patient tries to walk or touch their knee according to which position it was dislocated in, and when you reduce the dislocated hip joint with its socket, that will be made clear to you manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch one's own muscle."
"And you should reduce it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms; for if an abscess forms, the reduction becomes difficult, and often it is not healed completely. And especially when it is dislocated in back positions, because among all other species of dislocation this one is the worst, causing much pain, and many times death ensues from that."
"And the reduction of it, when it is possible to reduce it, consists in extending the limb with two hands and abducting the leg; then place your hands on the hip joint and push it back into its socket with the pressure of both palms together or with the palm of your hand turned inward so that it returns to its proper position."
"But if the dislocation is in front positions, then return it thus by flexing the limb with your hand upon it until it impacts the hip joint with the palm of your hand."
"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and great force."
"And it is that two assistants should extend the limb, and hold it firmly in place with two hands so that it is not removed during extension."
"And then it should be rotated towards all parts because a long folded bandage is wrapped around the hand of the limb or the limb itself."
"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should grease it with some oil so that it may facilitate those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint. And then push the joint back vigorously until it returns."
"And then the reduction of it should be kept upon that support where there is stability and elevation with album of wool, and it should be extended with a descent suspension and the limb suspended from the neck for some days."
"And then let it be untied; but if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you may untie the bandage from it and leave it alone."
"But if you see that the joint is not strong, then apply the compress and bandage again and leave them on for some days until it is extended. And then untie it."
"But if gravity is against the reduction of the joint and the position of the limb is in motion, then apply moistening with bath and gentle friction and pressure until it is alleviated. Or place it on elevated support so that it may be a thing of moving fat. And then bind it and leave it alone over the bone day and night." "And then remove that and put him in a bath; and when he is warm, then rub the joint with gentle friction, and then place it on elevated support so that it may be a thing of motion once again, twice, thrice." "and repeatedly bathe it until it becomes limber."
"And if you wish, place it on a moistened and scraped cowhide fold and press upon it. And do this several times until that becomes moistened and reduces to its proper position."
"Chapter XXVIII"
Of the treatment of dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
"Sometimes the wrist is dislocated and its reduction is easy, whereas the opposite is true for other joints. However, care should be taken to reduce it quickly in the moment that it occurs, before inflammation sets in or any swelling forms."
"And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist of the patient on a table and an assistant extends the hand of the patient. Then the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
"But it is important to consider whether the palm has already been dislocated onto the front of the hand. If it has, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. But if the dislocation is anterior to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intricately placed on the table so that the palm of the physician may fit over the prominence of the joint."
"And then if it returns immediately, that is good. But if not, then apply pressure with a compress to reduce the swelling and leave it alone. And do not repeat this, because if not done carefully, you will not be able to succeed in reducing it after some days have passed."
"But the joint becomes stiff according to its tortuousness; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but simply tell him that his hand is softened and cannot strengthen for any reason. Then you know that the nerves are compressed or torn, and then there will be no improvement in it unless it is strengthened with caustic applied near its attachment and rubbed gently with some cause."
"So when the dislocation has returned, then apply the compress which we have recommended and leave it on for five days. And then untie it and let it rest and exercise the hand of it."
"But if the motion of that is lost and there is some gravity in it, then lenify it with cold water and gentle friction several times until it is alleviated."
"Chapter XXIX"
Of the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Sometimes the toes are completely dislocated.
"And when one of those toes is dislocated to the back or front of it, then grasp that toe and press upon its dislocation with your thumbs until it returns."
"And then support the head of the toe, suspend it over the part where it is dislocated and leave it for two days."
"And then suspend that and extend it until the day is finished."
"And when night comes, bind that according to this description and do not cease loosening it in the day and exercising it with motion. And bind it at night for several days until it is straight."
"And do the same in this way if it is dislocated to the front of the hand, and bind it at that angle and do your first operation with it until it is healed."
"And similarly do this when it is dislocated to other parts."
"Chapter XXX"
Of the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
"When complete dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae or those of the neck, which are removed from their proper positions, then there is no treatment for that because death will overtake the patient."
"And the sign of that is that the evacuation of the patient occurs involuntarily without his being able to retain it. And many times some members of him or both legs of him or both arms of him are paralyzed, or one of those. Or else one vertebra has been removed from its position because often times such removal has occurred and likewise the dislocation of them has happened in all four directions."
"So that is already removed to the posterior direction and is called paralysis."
"But the treatment of it is that you should then consider whether the paralysis has occurred from birth because in that case there is neither treatment nor healing for it."
"However, in the manner that it comes by chance or by percussion or similarly, as was explained by the Ancients with lengthy speeches, which return mostly in vain; yet I have abbreviated that of which little excused the excess of it, due to my proximity to my intended exposition, with which this has been explained and formed from diverse instruments."
"And among these, only that one is cured which occurs properly in the back, with what I recount here."
"And it is that if the disease extends over its surface near a wall, and is extended from below up to where the tool touches it, then the stone will not be harmed."
"And properly a straight beam should be placed, set on the ground at the end of the stone near its head, and another beam laid across its feet at the other end of the stone."
"And the servant should hold the beam, and not be held in a hole; and another servant should hold the other one according to that form."
"And properly wrap the head of the stone and below its titlings firmly with a rope; extend the end of the rope to the beam that is above the head of it, and tie it there; and also stretch the other rope over the haunches of the stone on both sides of it, and place it under the curves of it; and properly adjust all the ropes and tie them to the other beam that is above the feet of it."
"And properly each servant should extend the rope at the departure of the beam, and the two beams and ropes of their places in which they are set should not be moved, but nevertheless not fastened as we have said."
"And the doctor should place his palms on the stone with firmness while it returns, or if he places them on that one table, then properly adjusts his feet on the table while it returns."
"But if it does not return by this method, then take a plank whose width or length is about three brazas, and dig in the wall that we have said is near the stone a place in which the end of the plank can be inserted." "And properly place the middle of the plank on the stone, and the doctor places his weight on the other end, and stretches well so that the stone is constricted and returns to its place."
"And if you wish, turn the stone that has revolved with your hand; and if you place yourself on the ground near the head of the stone in the rear of the two beams, the length of which is one braza, and similarly place yourself at the head of it behind the two beams; and let the distance between each beam be a palm, and already each beam is drawn in the one that returns, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it is not moved."
"And let there also be one round beam on which the stone turns, and let it be turned in the two tracks of the two beams."
"And at its end is a track in which the beam is fitted, the length of which is a palm and a half when it is turned; and the other two beams are similar to this one."
"And properly stretch the ropes that you have stretched in the stone of the stone at the track that is above its head, and the ropes that you have stretched on its sides at the turn that is under its feet."
"And properly place one servant near each turn who twists the beam with his hand, and the doctor guides the stone as we have said."
"And then when the stone has returned and the place is cleared, then you should put plaster with album of egg white and also cotton; and properly place it on the plaster as on a table whose width is about three fingers or somewhat more, and its length is the quantity that takes the place of the concavity, and at the departure of the stone."
"And properly let it be bound with the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the stone for nourishment until it is healed."
"And if there remains some tenderness in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and clean with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already a lead plate is administered in that place."
"And sometimes tenderness occurs in the back of the two buttocks and it is cured by that dislocation; and this bone already inclines towards breaking because it should not be opened with this medicine, for strong labor will cause you to die."
"Chapter LXXXI."
"Of the cure of a dislocated hip."
"You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only endures dislocation alone, and it does not happen to these as it happens to other joints with little movement and concavity."
"And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: because it is dislocated at its inner parts, or at its outer parts, or at its front parts, or at its rear parts."
"And more often it is dislocated at its inner parts, and less so at its front parts or its rear parts."
"The sign of dislocation at its inner parts is that when you press the healthy buttock against the sick one, it becomes longer and the anus appears more prominent than in the healthy one; and the sick one cannot bend his knee downwards, and the place where the knee touches is hot with red inflammation due to a bruise, because the head of the bone has already come here."
"The sign for that one in whom dislocation occurs at its outer parts is that his accidents are contrary to this accident."
"The sign for that one in whom dislocation occurs at its front parts is that he extends his buttock completely but does not bend it without pain that is in the anus; and if he tries to walk he cannot do so at the front parts; and his urine is retained and his abdomen is inflamed; and his walking is done on tiptoe."
"The sign for that one in whom dislocation occurs at its rear parts is that he does not extend his anus and cannot bend it forwards, but only backwards; and his buttock appears shorter than the other one, and the abdomen is softened; and the head of the bone is near that place."
"But the reduction of the kinds of this dislocation is that you should consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already happened with its being in such a state; then you administer reduction according to its disposition, but if it is not in that cure; and therefore no opening should be made at that time."
"But in that one whose dislocation is recent and is one of the four kinds of dislocation, you should strive to return the joint, extend it at its inner parts and outer parts, and move it to the right and left; because strong labor returns it and there is no need for another cure."
"But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong lever and extend the buttock of that side, or with its mass, or with a band which is tied above the anus; and another assistant extends his hand over it in such a way that he places his hands behind the thigh; and you yourself pull strongly with a band over the bone of the thing; and another assistant holds the end of the band."
"The extension of his or her leg from within to the angle at the shoulder blade, or from behind to the point of the elbow."
"And all this should be done in one go while the patient is lying on their back with their head hanging down."
"And this type of extension is specific to each of the four."
"If the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good. Otherwise, now is necessary for each type of this what to say about its own treatment."
"In the reduction of the leg itself, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is on the inner side, the patient should be made to sit up on their left side; then apply pressure on the ligaments over the ridge of the hip in that place where between the head of the hip and the place that is next to the angle of the shoulder blade."
"And then another should strongly seize the leg of him or her, and firmly hold the thick part of the diseased hip, extending it forcibly outward, for that will return to its place."
"And this method is one of easier treatment whereby this member is reduced than the other methods."
"But if this does not succeed at once and you do not obey the entrance with this method of treatment for all, then both feet of the patient should be lifted together with a strong, light lien over both ankles and calves."
"And let the length of each be about four fingers, and let the limb of the patient be extended more than the other by two fingers."
"And then the patient should be suspended from the top of the pillar and let him or her hang downwards, with his or her leg hanging down to the ground about two cubits."
"And then command one strong youth to seize the head of the hip, and let him or her hang together with the patient; and another youth push the hip with great force, for the joint will return to its place with speed."
"But in the reduction itself, when there is dislocation on the outer side, the patient should lie down on his or her back according to what we have recommended in the case of gibbosity; and let the lien be stretched over the diseased limb properly and over the foot of it."
"And then two pillars should be placed, one at the foot and the other at the head; and another pillar should be fitted into the middle of the gap, covered with damp cloths, so that the patient may not be injured by the pillar being between his or her thighs, for thus the extension to the joints will not be hindered."
"And then each minister should extend his or her part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art."
"But when the dislocation is on the front parts, then the limb should be extended lightly, and this is according to the method described above on the elbow; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the knee of the patient, and soon after catches that with the other hand, and with that catching extends it at the joints to the ankle."
"But if the dislocation is on the back parts, then the patient need not be extended at the joints, but should be elevated from the ground. Then it will be necessary to place him or her on a hard couch, as it would be in the case of a dislocated shoulder according to what we have said about the setting up of two shoulders; and he or she lies on his or her face with the lien extended thus."
"And compression should be administered with a board over the place where the joint is located."
Therefore, once the reduction is completed as it should be - and the sign of the reduction of that member is not hidden from you, which is that you stretch both thighs of the patient, and when you do those movements and the patient extends their thigh and expands that side without excuse, then you know that the member has been returned as it should; then you adjust both sides and place a compress and extend with a bandage so that nothing be hidden in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
And afterwards release the ligament and the compress, and compare one thigh with the other.
Then if you see those movements in truth, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and at that point let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that member again, and stretch it according to your first method, and leave it for three days.
And afterwards release that member, and have the patient walk on crutches for a few days until they are strengthened.
Chapter XXXII
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee joint
The knee joint is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated at the outside parts, inside parts, and behind parts; but it cannot be dislocated at the front parts.
The sign of dislocation of it is that when you command the patient to apply their thigh against their shinbone, then you know that the knee joint is dislocated.
And the reduction of all kinds of it is that you make the patient lie on their right side, so that they can extend their thigh if possible; then place your two hands against the joint, and place the sole of your foot between their feet; next press the knee joint with the palms of your hands and hold it there firmly with both your hands while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the knee joint returns to its proper position.
The sign of reduction of it is that when the thigh adheres to the shinbone with ease and without labor.
And afterwards plaster it and have the thigh adhere to the shinbone; next bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then release them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for some days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if reduction of it cannot be done by you, then apply strong extension with splints, as in the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint previously described.
Chapter XXXIII.
"Of the treatment of ankle dislocation."
"Sometimes the ankle is merely sprained by minor trauma, and sometimes it becomes dislocated completely, in which case the dislocation occurs either inward or outward."
"And the sign of ankle dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells at the joint from which it has become dislocated."
"The treatment of an ankle sprain is relatively easy: the foot should be extended with ease and its movements restricted until it returns."
"However, in the treatment of a completely dislocated ankle, you must firmly grasp the patient's foot and have a strong servant hold the joint behind them at the midpoint of the leg."
"And place your right hand with your thumb above the top of the foot and your left hand below it at the level of the heel."
"And pull the foot towards you with your right hand while pressing twice with your left hand, and then extend it with your left hand, pushing the sole of the foot up with your right hand without twisting."
"And perform this maneuver twice as we have described."
"And finally push the sole of the foot up on the third attempt, and you will be at the heel."
If this procedure is repeated once or twice more, and if the foot becomes swollen, then that's good. Otherwise, repeat the operation because that one has returned.
But if you are prohibited from reducing the hernia with what has been mentioned above, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a small stone between their thighs, ensuring it is firmly placed. Then quickly cover them with cloth so that the patient does not slip.
And the minister of the thighs should hold them in place, and another minister should extend the leg with their hands or some linen placed on the top of the thigh. And each minister should stand in such a way that they can fully extend their side, and the small stone should be held between the patient's thighs to prevent the body from being pulled towards its sides during the extension.
"The doctor then reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another attendant holds the healthy limb in place, for the dislocation returns easily."
"And once the dislocation has returned and declared to be in good health from its reduction, plaster is then applied and strengthened with bandages, and the foot is tied to the bed."
"And be careful or guard against touching the nerves which are behind the heel bone, for they not press on it too vigorously."
"And then leave that for two or three days. And if the bandage becomes moistened, change it."
"Then remove the splint on the third or fourth day, and prohibit walking for forty days." "But if it is necessary to walk during that period, there is danger that the dislocation will not remain firm and may be corrupted, so that it will receive no cure."
"And if an ulcer should form from the cautery, then you should apply to it the same treatment as described earlier in this narrative, until it is healed."
Chapter XXXIV.
"On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Ankles"
"The one who has been dislocated should be gently stretched without struggle."
"If the dislocation is in some bones of the lower back, you should then make the patient lie on their stomach on the ground or on a table."
"And then place your hands on the patient's back at the joint area and press down with force until it pops back into place. Ensure that it has been repositioned correctly."
"Then place the patient's stomach on a table that can support their entire weight. Place two pillows under them and keep them immobilized with a firm but gentle stretch for three days. Then remove the restraints and allow the patient to rest from walking for a few more days until they have regained strength."
Capítulo XXXV
"Chapter XXXV. Of the different types of dislocation that occur with fracture or breakage, or both at once."
"When one of those causes occurs and you attempt to treat it and restore the patient, many times death will ensue."
"And therefore one should not presume to undertake the treatment of such cases, but only someone who is skilled in the art, experienced, compassionate and merciful, careful, not hasty or arrogant. And at the beginning of treatment, one should use medicines that only draw out corrupted humors, and leave the patient to the divine judgment, hoping for recovery rather than perdition, with alleviation of the illness and some hope of success." "And therefore, as soon as possible after the onset of the cause, make an effort to reduce the dislocation before a corrupted ulcer forms."
"And if the member returns as desired, then apply treatment that will draw out corrupted humors and heal the wound with suitable remedies for dried-out flesh."
"And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the bone fragments are separated, then attempt to reduce them, following what has been said previously about simple fractures in those locations."
"And guard and avoid entering the paths of fear according to your ability, as I have previously commanded you; for this is better for you than anything else that you owe to your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and healthier for your true self in your time." "So endeth the words of Albucasis, may God bless them." "Amen."
