"Oh, my children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, due to its completion it has come to an end. And because of its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I fulfill what I promised to you with this treatise, which deals with surgery by hand."
"Since the operation by hand is almost entirely lost in our region and time, to such an extent that the science of it is completely forgotten, and only a few descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which are now changed hands and have become obsolete due to their errors and mistakes. Therefore, its intentions are closed and its power weakened."
"And it seems to me that I should revive this with an ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, both for addition to the clarification and preparation of it, which is necessary."
"However, the reason why there is no good craftsman with his own hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must be well-trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the joints of the limbs, their shapes, connections, separations, knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, their numbers, arrangements, and locations of pulsating veins and quiet ones."
"And therefore Hippocrates says that 'in the name but not in deed', meaning that he excelled more in writing than in surgery."
"But we have already said at the beginning of this book that anyone who does not know what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error and cause many deaths. For I have seen too many such cases, where some are formed in this science but depart from it without knowledge or experience."
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who operated on an abscess in a woman's neck, cutting some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out and the woman died immediately."
"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man's bladder that had become very enlarged. He came and removed that stone along with a piece of the bladder wall, causing the man to die three days later."
"And I had already predicted that this would happen, for I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, he would certainly die."
"And I saw another doctor who was paid by one of our dukes to perform surgery. This doctor approached a blacksmith with a dislocated hip fracture. However, due to his ignorance, he reduced the dislocation improperly using pillows and wedges with great force, not allowing the hip joint any room to breathe."
"And he then relocated the limb according to his desires, but when he reduced it, he immediately released it and left it alone for some days. Then he commanded that the bandages be removed, and thus he caused the hip joint and thigh to become inflamed, leading to ruin."
"And I was called to him, and I prepared to release the bandages. Then he became calm and free from his pains."
"But nevertheless, corruption had already established itself in the limb, so that I could not prevent it. And corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient died."
"And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess. The wound became ulcerated after some days, and the malignancy of it was greatly magnified in the patient."
"This is because cancerous tumors are caused by black bile. Therefore, it is not necessary to cauterize them completely with hot iron, but rather to operate on the limb that suffers from it so that it may be hosted."
"And therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you to divide surgery into two parts: one part concerns operations associated with health, and the other involves works in which there is great danger in most dispositions."
"And I have already stated this in every place throughout this book where there is mention of operations involving error and danger. Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it alone, so that foolish people may not find an opportunity to speak and bring dishonor upon you."
"Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and treat your patients with skillfulness and steadfastness."
"And follow the best path through the grace of God, losing your way to health and success. Leave behind difficult diseases that are hard to cure, and put aside your fears, so that you may remain steadfast in your faith and name: for it is more glorious for you, both here on earth and afterwards, with regard to your sanctity."
"Just as I have stated in some previous discourses:" "Do not treat an illness badly, lest you be named a bad doctor."
"And I have already divided this book into three sections according to its contents."
"Begin the division of the book, starting with the first part." "The first chapter is concerned with the following topics within the first section: the shape of instruments and the forms of cauterizing irons, and what is necessary for surgery."
"Division of the second part" "The second chapter is about cautery and perforation, cupping glasses, ligatures, extraction of arrows and similar objects, all ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter is about reduction and relocation, and treatment of torsion and similar conditions. This chapter is organized according to the shape of instruments."
"It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of those things that are useful and harmful in cauterization, and in what condition cautery is prohibited."
"Therefore, I say that the discussion about the qualities of what is useful and harmful in cautery is long and detailed, subtle through science, and secretively concealed. Many wise men have spoken at length about this topic, and they disagree with each other on it. It suffices me to mention a little of their discussions, for fear of prolonging."
"And therefore I say that cautery generally benefits all conditions universally, whether they are material or immaterial, except for two conditions which are without matter."
"In the case of a dry and hot complexion with matter that is out of order; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is due to heat and dryness, since fire has qualities of heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate for an illness of a hot and dry nature with matter that is cauterized and dry to be healed in this way."
"And he who says the opposite of that, namely that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies, argues that when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man very similar."
"I say according to the speech of him, that I have experienced this many times myself."
"However, it is not necessary for me to speak further about this, since the matter has already been thoroughly examined and discussed in the chapter on cautery. And having known the diversity of complexions among men, the disposition of illnesses within them, their causes, accidents, and duration of time, [I have covered] everything."
"But in other complexions, there is no doubt, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, for all physicians agree about them, and they are not in disagreement about the benefit of cautery in those cases."
"And know, my son, that the secret of curing with cautery by fire and its effectiveness lies in cautery with burning medicine. For fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member that is cauterized, and it does not harm any other member adjacent to it except with a slight injury."
"But the action of burning medicine extends to those members that are burned by it, and sometimes it causes illness in them that is difficult to cure, and sometimes it even causes death."
"But fire, because of its subtlety and its good substance, does not do anything except superfluous. And we know this through experience and the length of service in study with the art concerning the truth of causes; therefore I am excused from lengthy speech. And if it were not that my book is not yet read in this place, I would conceal from you in this pause a secret about fire, namely the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsive power by which it expels illnesses, demonstrated with philosophical proof, which would clarify your thoughts."
"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm that may occur by chance is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by the cautery. And especially if the cautery is performed for pains or necessary operations, such as fistulas, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that greater malice will come, which is worse than a slight injury entering through time."
"And do not think about this, my son, for only the common people and foolish physicians estimate that. For those illnesses that are cured by cautery have a remedy at all times, but they postpone it."
"And the reason is not as they imagine it to be because cautery is only a substitute for medicine that alters complexion and dries out humidity, which are the cause of pain."
"But nevertheless, cautery is superfluous over medicine because of its volatility and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its heat."
"But it is possible that the illness returns at some time in the future, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the virtue of cautery, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of its superfluities, and what is received by it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes. But the illness in which cautery is administered should be a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humidity; thus, cautery for toothache and similar ones does not usually return, but this occurs rarely."
"And also the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is truer than they understand it to be because they believe that nothing else profits besides cautery."
"But the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine only applies when other methods of cure are tried for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cautery is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits there." "And from now on understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention understood by the common people and many foolish physicians."
"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this because of anything other than the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true because I have seen and proven that this is only the case in some bodies without others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron, as they said. But when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you because it depends on the quantity of heat that you want from the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust the ignition, the gold will melt in the fire, and some laminae may fall into the fire due to the occupation of the artisan."
"And for that reason, cautery with iron should be performed more gently and more moderately according to the virtue of its operation."
"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the chapters so that later you can find what you want from them."
"The first chapter."
"This cautery helps against humidity and coldness in the serous accident caused by these two causes, such as soda and multitude of fluxes called coriza from the head to the parts of the eyebrows and ears flowing, and multitude of sleep, and toothache and jaw pain, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sodomitisal diseases, and apoplexy, and similar ones in these illnesses."
"The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine clarifying the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the illness and the age of the patient and his habit require."
"And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then perform the cautery between your hands over a carpeted bench and have him place his hands on his knees."
"And then place the edge of your palm just above the bridge of the nose between his eyebrows." "But however, when your little finger reaches the middle location, mark that spot with a tent and then ignite the olive oil cautery of which this is the form:"
"And then place that over the spot marked with a tent in such a way that it descends while your hand is gradually constrained and you turn it."
"And then lift your hand gently and observe the spot. If you see any amount of bone already exposed on the head, as much as the amount of a grain of barley, then raise your hand again, and if not, turn your hand with that iron, but another one if it has cooled, until you see what I have said to you."
"Then take some salt and dissolve it on that spot; let it sit for three days."
"And pause over the burn wound at its edges, letting it sit until the fire's skin is destroyed." "And then treat the spot with tetrafarmacon cream until it heals."
"And they said that when the plague is opened, the arm should be bandaged more tightly, for it is better and more beneficial in this way."
"And some of them said that the vein should be cauterized near to the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's head is adhered."
"And then scrape off what has adhered to the bone, and then it shall be healed."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end, it should be pressed onto the bone with great force until the bone cracks, and this is the small form of alphecati." "And they believe that from that spot the vapors of the head expire."
"And let the opened plague be held for a long time, and then it shall be healed until it is consolidated."
"But I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries in any man, except some because of fear; and leave that, it seems to me, better is with health when it is; for the head is softened by solution of continuity from this same as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the disease is very strong."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and that way with that work is healthier."
"Chapter Seven:"
"Of the cautery for the head."
"When severe and prolonged headache occurs in a patient who uses various remedies such as ointments, poultices, bandages, emplasters, powders, cataplasms, liniments, etc., especially if cautery has been applied without improvement, consider whether the patient's head is constitutionally strong. If it is not hot and dry but rather moist and cold, then cauterize again with another cautery." "He cauterized that over the horn of his head with a cautery until the flesh was parted." "Cut the flesh until you see the amount of bone we mentioned and cauterize him with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'the vessel,' which is also where cupping is performed." "And be gentle in this, and do not expose the bone, for this disease causes less pain than all other cauteries of the head."
"And this cautery should be applied in its proper place, for it is necessary to use a more subtle cautery on the horns of the head and the occupit than that used on the middle part of the head. This is its form."
"Chapter Three."
"Of the cauterization of non-ancient migraine."
"When severe pain occurs suddenly in the part of the head, or there is persistent pain extending to the ear, evacuate with medicines that cleanse the head and administer the other treatment mentioned earlier for this disease. But if it does not help, cauterization is then performed in two ways: either cauterization with a medicine that causes burning, or with iron."
"The cautery with a burning medicine is made as follows: Take a dollop of aloe and scrape it clean, then remove both its ends." "And then carefully cut the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until you see the bone beneath the flesh, but do not expose it."
"Then press over it with a hot compress for a moderate constriction and leave it there for the space of three hours. Then remove it and take away the aloe and let the wound lie open for two or three days, then apply a poultice of bread dough around it until the area becomes dry."
"And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed."
"If you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines."
"The cauterization with iron according to this method is as follows:"
"And it is called 'closed nails', for its head is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in the middle of it."
"And apply pressure onto the painful spot, hold your hand steady — so that the heat of the iron is not wasted — and slowly move it back and forth with speed."
"And if the amount of heat absorbed by the skin is as much as its magnitude, lift your hand up so that the artery that is left is not burned, so that blood does not flow."
"And apply cotton soaked in saltwater onto the spot and leave it there for three days; and then apply warm compress with its edge and cure it with ointment until it heals."
"And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the catheter according to cautery and beware of cutting into an artery in this migraine that is not ancient."
"Chapter Four."
"On the Cautery Treatment of Ancient Migraine."
"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous cure and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, but the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the catheter within until it becomes white. Because it signifies onto the spot of the pain with a line of length equal to its magnitude or longer; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen that until you incise the artery and bring about inflammation up to the bone."
"However, it is necessary that you guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is moved by mastication; and that the nerve is not burned nor the nerves that move it; and that spasms do not occur."
"And if it is about the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that is opened, because in the opening of it there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studied nor practiced; leave the operation at the beginning."
"And I come with remembrance of the regulation of accidental blood flow from the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book."
"And if you see this illness that does not abate with this cautery and you see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have recounted before, and cure the ulcer until it is healed."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the stricture of artery with cautery having two catheters, and this is better cautery and more confirmative."
"Chapter Five."
"On the Cauterization of Earaches."
"When in the ear there is pain due to friction and it is cured with laxative causes and other cures that have been mentioned in the division, but the pain is not removed, then heat the cautery, which is called puncta, of which this is its shape:"
"And when it has been heated, apply it around the entire ear as if a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one." "And go along with the cautery to the root of the ear little by little until you feel the spot with your tent."
"And if you cauterize with ten punctures around the entire ear, and it is sufficient, then cure those spots until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
"On Cauterization of Dizziness."
"Dizziness that is cured with cautery is only of those species which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses."
"Avoid cauterization for the species that occurs due to dryness or spasms of nerves."
"When treating that type of tumor with herbs and caper spurge and garlic, if your treatment does not help, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of two lips."
"Then pause your cautery in the contrary direction to where the wound is, for softening only occurs on the part that appears sound."
"And the manner of cauterization is such that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, then slightly above the horn of the head, and on the temple, whose length should be equal to the length of your finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until it has consumed about half the thickness of a rope."
"And this is the form of the cautery, which is specific to barbers, and its shape is described before us." "But it is still more subtle than what you see here; and it would be better to cut away excess roughness in place of unnecessary delicacy."
"And apply the cure with that which is described in its proper place until it is healed."
"Chapter VII."
"On cauterizing ancient stroke (apoplexy)."
When apoplexy is ancient and the cure for it is what we have said, and the patient does not confirm your medicine but has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and one cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and another cautery on the cheek. And the manner of cauterizing is done according to what has been said above.
Now cauterize over the mouth of the stomach, and it should be more recent; then it shall be cured with what you will prescribe.
Chapter VIII
On cauterizing for oblivion caused by a tumor.
"Give the patient at the beginning large jars and purifying pills."
"And then cover the entire head of the sick person, pausing on its crown, place the plaster described in the treatise on plasters."
"And pause for some time, because this is a manner of cautery." "And do this according to that methodical order which I have already mentioned."
"If this does not heal well, then perform three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the most superior part of the head toward the most inferior part of the neck." "And pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then immediately dress the cautery with what has been produced."
"But if you see that the patient tolerates this badly, then perform the cautery in the middle of the head; but if you want greater cautery, then cauterize him on both temples."
"And dress it immediately until it is healed; and let the cauteries be round according to the shape mentioned before."
"Chapter IX."
"Burning of parasites and softening of the entire body."
"After preparing the head with erasures and water as we have said; then remove the patient's hat, and burn that area with a cautery in the middle of the head, and apply cauteries to all the corners of the head, and apply cauteries to the back part of it, and apply three cauteries to the cervical vertebrae."
"And if it is necessary to soften the body too much in illnesses that are poorly tolerated and the illness is severe, then apply four cauteries on the lumbar vertebrae, and also apply a cautery on the sacrum between the buttocks, lifting up the thigh." "And also cure that area with olive oil, after it has healed, using a cautery."
Chapter .x.
"On cauterization for epilepsy."
"No one is cauterized except in the case of epilepsy caused by phlegm."
"And therefore at the beginning of the illness, prepare the brain with erasures and the other treatment which we have said in the division when the illness is great and poorly tolerated except for medications."
"And if the child cannot tolerate medications, then administer gargarisms and mastigators to soften the brain, for several days before, with beneficial diet."
"And also shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner previously mentioned, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and cauterize each corner of the head." "And if the illness is severe and poorly tolerated, then cauterize it with cauteries as mentioned earlier, having paralysis and softening of the body on the cervical vertebrae and lumbar vertebrae."
"And let it be cauterized with olive oil according to what has been said previously."
"But if the illness is in a child, then pause and use subtle cauteries in this manner:"
Chapter .xi.
"On cauterization for melancholy."
"When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as mentioned earlier, having paralysis."
"And if the cause of melancholy is declining towards it due to excess, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink that which cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in this division."
"And also shave the head of the patient, and then make a small poultice well-made of it on the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head."
"And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held by someone from every part."
"And also apply a liniment, and then it is worthy of being rubbed with lamb's fat." "And heat it on the fire for gentle warmth by measure, which the patient should suffer when it is applied to him." "And then place it in the middle of the head of the patient within the circle, and leave it until it has cooled down."
"And do this with the patient once a week until he is healed, with the other regimen of him being well; or if you wish, cauterize it making small punctures according to his strength, but keep your hand with such an arranged cautery: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality."
"And then apply that poultice wrapped in a bandage or a piece of wool."
Chapter .xii
"On cauterization for descending water in the eye."
"When it has been declared to you that the beginning of water in the eye has appeared through the signs which I have mentioned earlier in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink what cleanses his head, and protect him from all humidity."
"And make him take a bath with hot water for several days."
"And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water in both eyes, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one eye."
"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are close to the neck; and let the cauteries be in that length on the level of the temples."
"And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine, which is at your disposal."
"And I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and caution concerning fluxes of blood."
"And sometimes it is cauterized on the back of the neck near two bones with two cauteries producing smoke."
Chapter .xiii
"On cauterization for old tears."
"When tears of the eyes are old and abundant, and it is found that this is due to thick phlegmatic excess in the veins and arteries which are manifested on the surface of the head, then cauterize it with a cautery as mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water rising in the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the back of the neck near the temples, and with two cauteries on the back of the neck near two bones." "And if you need addition, then cauterize it also on all sides of the cheekbone above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Chapter .xiiii.
"Regarding cautery for bad breath."
"When you treat that person with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not help, then prepare this ointment and give it to the patient to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave their head, and cauterize the area with a hot iron, using olive oil." "And then cauterize that spot with a clove-hot iron, placing two cauteries above the eyebrows on each side of the hairline."
"And be careful not to burn yourself with the hot cautery."
"This is how you apply the clove-hot cautery:"
"Chapter XV."
"Regarding cauterization for drooping eyelids."
"If the eyelid is drooping due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with an iron using this lunar cautery; and this is how it should be done:"
"And if you wish to do so, cauterize that spot above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in each part, and they should be elongated from the temples." "And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow."
"Don't press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to how much the third part of the eyelid should be burned."
"Chapter XVI"
"Regarding cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are turned inward and piercing the eye:"
"When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward so as to pierce the eye, cauterize them either with fire or with medicine that burns."
"If you cauterize with fire, first tell the patient to pull out his hairs like those who pluck them for depilation, until they are elongated and hardened; and if it pierces there, then stretch the eyelids with a bandage so that it is not harmed while the hairs are growing."
"Therefore, when they are grown and hardened, then have the patient hold his head steady in the air, and press the eyelid of the eye with a probe, shaped like a mortar leaf, and let the beginning of the probe be close to the hairs."
"And then pause on that spot by immersing it in powdered alum or mucilage of pimpernel on the eye."
"And then ignite the cautery, whose shape is like this:"
"And then cauterize along the figure which is marked here, bit by bit, with several glances, until its surface burns completely, just like a myrtle leaf."
"The sign of the good deed is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised above the puncture of the eye."
"Then raise your hand and leave him for three days, and then pause on that spot with a bandage until the scar is healed." "And then treat it with ointment until it heals."
"But if the hairs return again for some cause and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery once more on that spot just as you had done initially."
"But if the hairs are still on the eyelid, then cauterize them until they are raised to their natural place and hardened, so that they do not pierce the eye."
"But if you use a cautery with burning medicine, then order the patient to pull out his hairs until they are elongated and hardened, and then make a paper from cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf."
"And then take known soap and live coal ashes an ounce each, or whatever you have, and then mix those ashes well, and do this with haste so that it does not get cold; and then spread this on the paper made like a myrtle leaf shape, and place this over one eye or both eyes; and place some of that on the spot of the eye immersed in powdered alum, and let the patient's head be held upright."
"And then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without harming him until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is like that of fire."
"And then when he perceives that it feels like biting, then remove the medicine and wipe it with your finger; and then when the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is already raised just like it was washed from constriction with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, then return to that medicine on the spot where it has not been applied before and do not relent until your operation is hardened and the eye is contracted."
"And then place a bandage on that spot until the scar of adhesion is healed, and then treat it with ointment or some other thing until it heals."
"And it is necessary that you, during your operation, guard with vigilant diligence that no dirt from the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some hairs again pierce the eye for some cause, then repeat your medication on that spot where the eyelid has become softened, and exactly as you did at the beginning, and then heal it."
"And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf:"
"And know that human eyes are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly."
"And do not close the path of rectitude towards anyone who studies in this art."
"Chapter XVII."
"On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment is ineffective, then you should cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head on their own seat, and hold their head steady with some assistant's hands so that it is neither moved nor agitated by their head.
And then pause a piece of gauze or cotton wool soaked in hot wax or pitch on the wound, covering it completely.
And now ignite the cautery which is in this form:
which is cone-shaped, like the shape of a reed or vulture's feather, at one extremity where the cautery is made
And if you wish, it may be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you want, it can come out like this:
But that which is cone-shaped is better for your work.
"Then press on the abscess if it is open, and draw out its liquid and dry it." "And if it's not open, then lance that area and extract the pus from it."
"And then apply the cauterizer that has been well ignited, and press it on that area with a little force at the beginning of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or disturb the patient, and then pause the cauterizer in the wrinkles of the skin and char it."
"If at the beginning of your cauterization it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave that area thus for three days, and then apply to that wound with a border and surroundings with a drying ointment until it heals."
"But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then apply to it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is suitable in its chapter."
"And another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which was first described as follows: enter into the location of the fistula and burn it with this thin camphor wax of the shape of the fistula. And then put in there the amount of one grain of melted lead; and hold your hand on it with the camphor wax with good retention, so that the patient is not harmed because the melted lead does not reach the skin of that area; and cover that burned wound with albumen of egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing."
"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a suppository of the nose and reduce the fistula into the course of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of the cauterization of the anal fissure."
"Fissures often occur in the lips, and most frequently in the lips of infants."
"Therefore when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not help your treatment, then perform a small cautery incision according to this form that is shown here:"
"And let its concavity be according to the thinness of the scalpel."
"Then place that little incision carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissure."
"Then also heal it using wax, once it has been healed."
Here's sentence 19 to translate from Occitan:
Cauterization of a fistula in the mouth
When an apostema forms on the uvula or palate or tonsils and it bursts and becomes infected, and then breaks open and a fistula is formed, you should clean it out and not neglect its treatment. Otherwise, if necessary, you must cauterize according to the amount of pus received in the fistula, and put the heated iron into the opening of the fistula, and place your hand so that the hot iron reaches the front of it, and repeat this once or twice; then cure it with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
And if the bone is resected and healed, then it is good. But if not, it is necessary to expose the site and remove the decayed bone according to what is described in its chapter.
Chapter XX
Of cauterization of teeth and softening of gum abscesses.
When the abscesses are softened by moisture and teeth are affected, if you attempt to treat them with medicines but do not succeed, then place the patient's head on the pillow, immediately ignite the cautery whose shape is depicted here. Thus, you should place the pincers on the tooth and insert the ignited cautery swiftly, while keeping your hand slightly away so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
Then quickly withdraw your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you desire.
Then have the patient rinse their mouth with saltwater and hold it there for an hour, then spit it out. For the affected tooth will be solidified, the softened gum strengthened, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
Chapter 21
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness or worms in the tooth, or if medical treatment does not succeed, then cauterize it in this way:
"You should take a border of cowhide and stretch it tightly over the iron head of the cautery; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the cautery. Then quickly plunge the cautery bordered with cowhide into boiling water, and immediately apply it to the painful tooth before it cools."
"And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth."
"If you wish, dip wool or cotton in the cowhide border mentioned above and place it on the painful tooth, then place the red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the surface of the concavity of the tooth."
"But be careful with fire cautery: wait until the iron or coal is red-hot and glowing brightly in its center, without scorching the mouth of the patient."
"And then ignite the cautery according to its shape, and place it on the tooth with your hand until it cools down; do this several times until the pain disappears completely, either that day or the next."
"And it is necessary that after this cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good border and holds it for one hour, then spits it out. This is the form of the cautery."
"And cauterize according to what you wish or can, using extreme care."
"And this is the form of the cannula:"
"Chapter XXII."
"On the cautery of external prolapses."
"When prolapses are made of mucus and humors, rubbed on but not digested by medications, and you wish to promote digestion of them slightly, then ignite the cautery with this shape: it has two hollow extremities through which the smoke should rise from one end of the cautery to the other. Place the hot cautery on the prolapse once or twice until it reaches its surface."
"And if the prolapse is small, then place the cautery according to its size. Then let it rest for three days and apply it again on the edge of the wound until what was burned by the fire disappears."
"And afterwards dress it with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it is healed."
"Chapter XXIII."
"On the cautery of sorethroat and constriction of windpipe."
"When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, especially when it is due to coldness of temperament, then the patient should first be evacuated with laxative medicines. Then cauterize him on the back of his throat in the depressed place."
"But take care not to reach the gag reflex with the cautery nor burn much of the wall of the esophagus."
"And cauterize him also on the junction of his neck with the last cervical vertebra using another cautery." "The cautery should be applied thus for two or three times, following the manner described above."
"And then dress him as stated previously until he is healed."
"Chapter XXIV."
"On the cautery of lung disease and coughing."
"When coughing and lung disease are due to rubbed-on humidity, the patient has no fever or spitting of blood, and it is an old illness, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed places at both sides and below; and with another cautery in the middle of his chest between his two nipples. Apply the cauteries thus for two or three times following the manner described above."
"And if you wish, your cautery should be performed puncturing with the cautery called 'punctum,' the shape of which is given in the puncture for earache."
"Make punctures at those points; and then dress him with what has been stated previously until he is healed."
"And since the cautery has three branches for this operation, you can perform three cauteries following this shape in one session:"
"Chapter XXV."
"On the cautery of tittillio (i.e., twitching or spasms) which is called 'the head of the helper'."
"When the 'head of the helper' (i.e., the atlas vertebra) is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its proper position at the usual time, but rather moves slightly causing it to dislocate as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation. Then place the patient on his back or side. Then elevate the neck which is located within the citillo (i.e., the atlas vertebra) using your left hand so that the junction is reduced."
"And then apply the cautery, which has two heads. This is its shape:"
"And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates from one side to the other. Now follows the figure for cautery with four cauteries."
"Some times it may be appropriate thus, and there are eight cauteries in all."
"And then pause on the cautery for a short while with salt and water. Then have the patient lie quietly until he is comforted. Do not move him for any time."
"And if the dislocation is above and it happens thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a cautery applied thus or with multiple puncturing cauteries, for the junction is strengthened and the humidity is broken up and the patient is healed."
"Chapter XXVI."
"On the cautery of the stomach."
"When there is heat and much humidity in the stomach that it extracts from its temperament and produces many flatulent rumbles, if you continue with these remedies and do not help him, then place the patient on his back with his arms and legs extended. Then cauterize him thus: apply one cautery to his left side of his chest for the length of a finger using a cautery applied thus; and apply two cauteries below both sides of this cautery so that it forms a triangular figure. Lengthen those which are not well-adjusted lest they cause blisters."
"And the depth of the cauteries should be the thickness of two thumbs of the width of the neck."
"And this is the shape of the cautery according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach thus: and this will be one cautery shaped like a circle thus:"
"And the stomach should be punctured thus for those who are frightened by this cautery. And if you see on the stomach a puncture as large as you wish with a bandage, then cauterize it with a cautery at that point. Then dress him with the dressing stated previously until he is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On the cautery of a hot liver."
"When pain is felt in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness so that it deviates from its normal temperament by superfluous exit, and if the patient is not helped by what has been said here, then place him on his back with his head supported. Then apply three cauteries of this form and size thus over the liver on its left side near the hypochondria where a man lies on his right side."
"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right side of the chest."
"Do not press too much with the cautery."
"And if the amount of water that adheres is equal to half a finger's width in thickness, do not adjust it further. And if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie down, having already extended his arms and legs. Then raise his elbows."
"It is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery, if you possess subtlety and prudence in the art."
"And beware that you do not proceed in the cauterization, and ensure that the specific heat of the entire chain is maintained so that everything within it becomes heated, because here the chain is thin; and know this."
"Chapter XXVIII"
"Of the perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
"When an abscess or tumor forms in the liver and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the illness becomes serious and painful, without sharpness."
"And if it is in the membrane of the liver, then the pain is sharp and great, and often the physicians become tired of treating it."
"Therefore it is necessary that the illness be turned towards its back; and approach the location of the abscess with a finger; and then heat the cautery like wool, the shape of which has been previously described in another page." "And cauterize with that cautery until the entire chain is consumed, until it reaches the cyphack, until in ashes it becomes clean."
"And then treat it by the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed."
"And it is necessary that this form of cautery be used only by one who has prolonged his studies in the art of medicine and knows many illnesses; but even he should not attempt this operation without experience several times, but rather let those others do it, which is better."
"Chapter Twenty-Nine."
"On cauterizing pleasure."
"According to ancient methods of cautery for pleasure caused by the hilum of the testicle, follow this manner: Take a long, dry stick from the Aristolochia plant, pointed at one end, as thick as your finger."
"And then immerse that stick in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize with it at the spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries guide them, one a little inclined towards the side where the beard is, and with two cauteries inclining slightly between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclined somewhat toward the back parts; and with another cautery in the middle of the thigh; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery between the two buttocks, and with two cauteries on both sides of the thigh."
"And you do not need to hold your hand with the cautery, but it should be done quickly and surely."
"And it was said by some ancients that men use cauteries made of iron like a ray, and heat them in the place between the ribs until they reach the aposteme and cleanly burn it, as we have said concerning the aposteme on the liver."
"But in this case of cautery there is no fear of death, for such an occurrence happens rarely at the location called 'fistula', which does not heal."
"Chapter Thirty"
"On cauterizing the melons (testicles)"
"When you treat the disease of the testicles with what we have said about cure in division and your treatment does not improve, then cauterize it in this manner: According to three methods, all of which are correct. One method is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the testicle according to the figure of the liver cauteries, the shape of which has been previously described."
"And let each cautery be as thick as a finger or a little more, and the manner of cautery should be done in the same way we have described for liver cauteries."
"And do not hold your hand with the cautery; let the disease be evident on its own two sides."
"And another method of cauterizing is: heat the cautery having two vents, the cause of which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and elevate the cord which is towards the left testicle where the disease lies."
"And let your elevation be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made along the width of the body."
"And bring the two vents close together, lighted with a hot flame, until they penetrate the cord on the other side."
"Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made."
"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
"Then treat the cautery as soon as it has ceased to discharge blood for several days, because it is more effective than the other causes mentioned in treatment."
"Chapter Thirty-One"
"On cauterizing hydrocele."
"Not to burn in hydrocele but rather on its wall properly."
"When you treat hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in this section and do not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen, and two cauteries between the spinal vertebrae, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach." "And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the scrotum."
"Afterwards, leave the cautery buried in order that it may burn for a long time."
"And do not remove the cautery until it has done its work properly so that two intentions are aggregated to it, and then it will be quickly removed with help of healing."
"The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a clavis, following its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive, as it has been previously described in its form."
"Chapter XXXII."
"Of cauterization of leprosy and of sores."
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near the area between the little toe and the ring toe, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then raise your hand and do not return that completely, for the serous water will subside.
This is how you should apply the cautery: First, make two cauteries on both sides of the thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the cutting edge of the cautery. And make the cautery along the length of the thigh, leaving one on the outer side and another on the inner side near the middle of the thigh, making two cauteries on each thigh.
And let the wound remain uncovered for some time so that no water may accumulate there.
Then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII
About the cautery of the belly.
When the belly suffers from wind and moisture inside that weakens the vital powers, such as the digestive and retentive powers which are in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with these methods of treatment without conferring, and sometimes the illness requires cautery to exhibit its virtue, at that time cauterize it on the same stomach according to what has been said before about the cauterization of the stomach, with a large cautery circle and four small cauteries around it, with a small nail-like cautery; and with one cautery on the spleen near the great kidney, or with two cauteries.
And if the moisture is excessive and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize on the penis and on the intestines, and closely apply two cauteries on the stomach near the groin, for this treatment is perfecting healing of which you should not err.
De cauterizacion de costelas e de bracs.
"Regarding the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids."
"When there are recent hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division [of medicine], then cauterize them with three cauteries on each side of the small triangle below the navel, and one cautery above the navel."
"If the stomach appears cold and the food undigested, and the face is pale and yellowish, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as described previously; and apply one cautery to the liver, and another cautery to the spleen using a pointed cautery, and leave it there for some time until the wound heals."
Chapter XXXV.
"On cauterization near the incision of hemorrhoids."
When thou cuttest away the vein, then thou ignitest the cautery that is assembled like a rod. Then insert this heated cauterizing instrument into the vein you have cut off, and finish closing its mouth so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, because if the veins are too large, then cauterize each one separately according to what has been said above, and afterward cure those with care using what is recommended for healing.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over some area, it is more likely to cause injury.
Chapter XXXVI
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of wounds in the parts of the flesh.
When nature does not obey the work recommended for it in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then let it be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when there is some vein fistula in the nature of a wound, and it is old, corrupted by corruption and moisture, then what is more fitting than to probe that with a subtle probe, and also know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Then heat the cautery which resembles a ray. And then insert this heated cautery into that fistula, according to how deep the probe enters.
"Burn the corrupt flesh with the cautery thrice, twice or once, according to your need."
"Be careful not to burn nerves or veins. If the fistula is in the bladder or the intestine, be especially careful with all those areas and do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is in a fatty location and you think it is not penetrating."
"And then treat the area once it has healed."
"If the area is sealed and the matter is cut off from it, and it remains like that for some time, then you know that it has healed completely."
"If the matter is not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or that the bone is corrupted nearby, or that this is due to one of those causes which will be mentioned later in its place."
"Chapter xxxvii."
"Regarding cauterization of warts."
"When the warts cause pain due to friction or large size, and consequently the patient's skin becomes irritated, it is necessary to cauterize each one with a hot iron, applying it to every wart with a pointed tip, taking care not to forget any."
"And then cauterize them again with the second iron, leaving a small space between each one, so that three lines of cauterizations are formed, and then continue with more cauterizations afterwards as needed."
"Chapter XXXVI."
"Regarding cauterization of the bladder."
"When the bladder suffers debilitation and softening due to friction and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, it is necessary to cauterize there on both sides of the pubic region, where the hairs of the pubis begin, applying one iron on the right side and another on the left."
"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair in the pubic region; and cauterize there with one iron on the lower part of the buttocks, or with two if necessary."
"And let the cautery have a pointed tip depending on what is needed."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"Regarding cauterization of the navel."
"When the navel suffers friction and humidity, making it difficult for conception to occur, corrupting menstrual flow, delaying its onset, and causing pain during menstruation, it is necessary to cauterize there with three cauterizations around the navel region, as we have described in the cautery of the bladder; and also apply a cautery on the lower part of the back, or two if necessary, using a pointed tip."
"Chapter XL."
"Regarding cauterization for dislocation of the anus."
"When moist discharges are abundantly emitted from the anal region, causing prolapse of its tissues, and a sign of this is that one side appears prolonged over the other when compared together." "And the location of the prolapse is found within the buttocks."
"Therefore you should cauterize the patient on the spot where the ankle bone is located using a circular cautery similar to this, since once you have felt with your hand in the area around it as it revolves, and thus that the ankle bone falls in the middle of the circle."
"And here is the cautery described earlier for use in cauterizing the stomach."
"If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three olive-sized cauteries."
"And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of heat throughout the whole cord; and afterward take care that the wound may heal."
"Chapter XL."
"Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein."
"When pain arises in the ankle joint due to friction and dampness, the patient is cured with what has been said [above] if it is not confirmed or outdated. Then you should purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills, and afterward cauterize that area."
"And the method of cautery in this case is done in two ways: either by cauterizing with burning medicines or by cautering with fire."
"First of all, according to two known methods, one of which is that you should cauterize the area around the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries arranged in this manner; and make them of good depth." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, if the cauteries are olive-sized or larger."
"But sometimes you should place the cauteries directly on the middle point above the ankle joint, so that there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle described in the cautery for dislocation of the ankle joint, so that it may contain and burn all the heat along the whole cord."
"And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adherent to the ankle and not extended into the joint."
"But if it extends into the joint, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the joint above the point where the pain is felt; and one cautery on the shinbone a little below that point on the left side."
"And if cauterizing with a knife (cautery), let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of heat in the cord."
"And if the pain extends to the point near the toes where you should cauterize that area with cauteries for three points or four or more as needed."
"And if the pain extends to the side below the joint, then cauterize that area with one knife cautery."
"And be sure in all cauteries not to finish with the cautery so as to burn any nerve or large artery, lest you cause harm or contraction."
"And I have seen some of those who cauterized on the shinbone and finished with the cautery, and the leg became swollen within so that the tumor reached the foot, and the foot was perforated and corrupted." "And indeed such a careless procedure is often followed by a sudden loosening of the belly, and often death results."
"And if pain is in two places at once, cauterize each according to this manner."
"And the wise ones said concerning cauterization of the ankle joint that this is the manner: make it like a ring of iron, whose circumference should be the size of a large palm; and let its opening be on the outside according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly more."
"And let that circle be followed by another third; and let the space between them be equal to the width of a finger joint; and let those circles be opened on both sides; and let their length be one or two finger widths, and make their edges of iron decently sharpened in the circles; this is its form:"
"And let it be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throwing sparks; and let it be placed on the party of the ankle where the pain is located on the inside." "And then cauterize that area with three reddened cauteries at one time."
"And then leave it for three days; or plaster that with mud and leave the wound open too many days; and cure it with honey until it is healed."
Albucasis says: "O son, concerning this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of its appearance and because few people regard it."
"But of all cauteries there is none like that one which suffers itself to be found in its place."
"But cauteries with adherent medicines are those which you should make two circles having holes pierced in them, into which let the end of an iron rod be inserted; let their length and thickness be such that they are two or three finger widths apart."
"And if the space between each is equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them be open on both sides and above, and let them contain something between them according to this form:"
"And let it be placed on the party of the ankle where the pain is located on the inside; and press your hand on the party of the ankle, and take boiled water and pour it between the two circles, whose heat should be increased gradually, and keep that for about an hour, until the pain has ceased from its biting and adhering — for that burns like fire — until the biting ceases."
"And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash off the boiled water from all the ankle with fresh water."
"And then leave it for three days and press on that area until the blackness of the adhering cautery disappears, and let it be so for some days, and afterwards wash it with honey; this is the last in treatment."
"And then cure it with honey until it is healed."
"And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make to it as was done for the ankle joint."
"This is the manner of boiled water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines." "Recipe: of alkali and of soda not quenched from both an equal party, grind them up and place in a new bowl whose lower part is pierced with a small hole according to the quantity that goes into it."
"And place underneath the bowl another vessel inverted, and pour onto that alkali and quicklime with fresh water until it covers them by one finger's breadth; then compress them with your hand with good compression, and leave the vessel which is going to fall from it boiling water to the inverted vessel."
"And then tighten all that water, and pour it onto more quicklime and fresh alkali, because at this time it will have very great strength, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, because it acts like fire."
"And so of some medicines with which the ankle is cauterized, such as treacle and honey and quicklime with soap, so that they are mixed."
"Galen recounts of a man among the ancients the operation and cure with which pain of the ankle and sciatic vein was cured, and he highly praised it, saying that no other cure is necessary, because it is healed at once as he recounted, for it entered into bath and eased immediately."
"And it is that it should be taken of green celery, and if it is not found green, fig leaves should be taken; let them be ground with a little salt and placed upon the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh or leg, and bound up."
"It should be left for three hours or as much time as the patient can bear without discomfort."
"Then immediately take him to bathe and feed him once his body is immersed in water, because the pain ceases and he becomes healed."
"And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless it's for the evacuation of the body."
"But as Aesculapius said, when a goat's vein is cut and the bleeding stops, he should apply a poultice to it. And this is how you cauterize: take some wool, dip it in old oil, and place it between the openings of the skin."
"And also take dry goat hair and heat it on fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool and let it cool." "And repeat this process, and don't stop until the sensation of the bite has reached the water, and then the pain will cease."
"And this method of cautery is called 'cautery of goats'."
"Chapter XLII."
"Of the cauterization of toothache."
"Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as kidney stones or blows or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to an infusion of hot and humid matter."
"But cautery is not useful except in this single case, which occurs from the effusion of hot matter."
"Therefore, first perform an evacuation of the patient with pills made from the same material as the one causing pain, placed on both sides where the pain occurs in three lines according to its width. Then apply cauteries with tenths in each line, depending on the quantity that comes out and the power of the disease."
"Then cauterization should be performed using pointed cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in a cross shape using a small knife-shaped cautery:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"On cauterization at the beginning of gibbosity (hernia)."
"It often happens that this disease occurs in young children. The sign of its onset in children is when the hernia appears suddenly while they are playing and moving around."
"And you should notice that it occurs at the last lumbar vertebra of the spine, where the hernia begins to protrude over the others."
"And when you see this and want to prevent it, immediately cauterize around that area with a circular cautery like this:" "so that the cautery covers all of the protuberance of the vertebra on both sides."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines:" "so that the points are close together."
"And then treat the area inside that has been healed as we have said."
"But be careful not to use a cautery in cases of hernia caused by spasms of nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
"On cauterization for gout and pain in the joints."
"When pain in the joints is caused by friction of humors that accumulate in each part of the body, it is customary for physicians to call this condition gout specifically when pains occur in the feet."
"And therefore, when gout caused by friction is being treated with medication but the pain does not disappear, then cauterize to remove it."
"and you should cauterize around the evacuation area of the joint of the foot using several cauteries:"
"And these cauteries should be olive-shaped, with this being their form:"
"If it is necessary to make points on the fascia of the foot, then do so using a pointed cautery." "And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize around each painful area with three or four olive-shaped cauteries like this:"
"If many cauteries are needed and these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize like this without pressing too hard with your hand before the cautery, being careful only around the skin of the joint."
"And if the pain moves into both toes, then administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter."
"And if the pain is only in the joints of the hands and it is called arthritis, then make punctures around the knuckles like this, making two lines of them."
"And if there remains some pain in the fingers, then make punctures around each knuckle and around the root of the thumb."
"And if the pain moves near to the joints of the bones or muscles, then cauterize each of them on all sides of the tendons."
"And do not evacuate the disease without good regimen and receipt of medicines, for if there is good regimen and the humor is evacuated with this cautery alone, God willing, it will be healed."
"Chapter XLIV."
"On cauterization of fractures."
"When a fracture occurs in the ankles or shins and the bowels begin to be obstructed before they reach the anus, you should order the patient to leave off food for that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the obstruction may pass from his belly."
"And then place the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath until the anus is open or the bowels appear."
"And then return him with your hands and gently press the fracture onto the bone of the hip, making sure that the end of it is like the middle of a circle on both sides of the body."
"And then heat the cautery which has this shape:"
"until it becomes very red-hot and emits sparks." "And then reduce the bowel or anus to its convexity, and quickly place your hand over it so that the bowel does not escape."
"And you have already placed yourself between the thighs of the patient and one thigh is paused with your hand, and another servant holds one of his limbs and another holds his foot, which should be held firmly."
"And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand and straightener, and apply it until you succeed in reaching the bone of the hip in the middle of the joint; repeat this procedure again if you do not succeed at first."
"And be careful to observe the sensation of the bowel during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and thus bring about the death or another serious injury to the patient."
"Know that if with the cautery you do not reach the bone, your operation is ineffective."
"And the cautery for children should be fine according to their size and proportion."
"And afterwards, care for the place of the cautery with a soft cloth for three days until the scar of the burn is removed."
"And then care for him with other remedies until he is healed."
"And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed."
"And you should pause the patient's nutrition according to the length of time for his cure, which loosens his belly, and so that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing."
"And when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer suitable food to him and have him lie on his back for another forty days."
"And he should be careful about work and exercise, food and drink, and loud voices, for if he follows this regimen of healing perfectly, he will surely be healed."
"I have spoken of the treatment of fractures in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning you wish them not to remain. Therefore cauterize the fracture with a round cautery according to its size, and it should be that which is taken from the bone as far as the third division of it; then care for him with what we have said, but do not follow this rule."
"And some first authors say that fractures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, for it is marked with a point thus:"
"And a line is drawn along the length of the side where the fracture rises and another line above it. Then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but let the first cautery be lighter and better."
"Chapter XLVI."
"On cauterization for torsion."
"When pain occurs in some members due to overexertion or blow and persists for a long time without being relieved by treatment with medicines, then cauterize with a pointed cautery."
"And let the cautery be of suitable size according to the magnitude and smallness of the member, its strength and weakness, location of the torsion and intensity of the pain."
"If it is not healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For such pains are often pierced in a member near to the one affected, so you must reach those with your cautery until the patient is healed."
"Chapter XLVII."
"On cauterization for leprosy."
"Some lepers are viewed with caution due to great harm and little improvement, especially those whose condition is caused by decay of phlegm and melancholy."
"Therefore, when you wish to cauterize this one, consider if the leprosy is common or already cured according to what we have said in the division above. Do not give it, if there isn't any, and fear that the corruption might spread throughout their whole body and entire complexion. Therefore, cauterize this one on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another towards the end of the hairline, and two on both horns; and one behind, on the nape or servants."
"And lastly, burn the cauteries slightly within so that they leave a small impression on the bone, and remove the scabs from them, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved. Then cauterize on the chest according to what is necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the malady and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize this one with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize on the extremity of the nose with two cauteries on each cheekbone, two on both shoulder blades, six on the spinal processes of the back, and one large on the spinal process near the coccyx, one on the coccyx itself, two on each ankle, one on each heel, two on each toe, two on the knees, and two on the muscles. Cauterize this one over all the joints of these members and feet, and on each sole of their feet, and on the cushions of their soles."
"And beware that you do not cauterize those nerves which are situated on the sole that you may not burn them."
"And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver."
"And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and advantage. And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as they do with their own sores, because the body of the sufferer is already anesthetized."
"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is prescribed by the species of instruments."
"And afterwards, cure the wound with a poultice made of bran, honey, and the other remedies until it is healed."
Chapter XLVIII
**On cauterization for stupor**
"When a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters yet is not healed, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness."
"And your cautery should enter just a little into the spine of the backbone." "Then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that some paralysis which is close to the hip or foot, and near the spine of the back where the nerves that move that limb originate, is removed after cauterization."
"But one should not presume to do this unless he is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body that moves everything."
"Chapter XLIX"
"On cauterizing warts that have been disfigured."
"When warts are old and do not disappear with the usual remedies of medicine, then cauterize over that one with a hot cautery iron slightly according to the quantity of the thickness of the spine of thewart until it is removed the whiteness and color of it, and its color is changed."
"Then dress it with flour of earth and lentils mixed with rose oil, and leaves of sage, and dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and then apply a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed."
"Chapter L"
"On cauterizing warts."
"If cancer begins and you wish to destroy it, then cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery iron as it turns."
"And they say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery iron in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen it happen sometimes."
"And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery iron as we have said, or with many cauteries."
"Chapter LII."
"For cauterization of varicose veins."
"If some varicose veins are delayed in maturation, this is due to the superfluity they produce, or the condition of the patient, who is elderly and decrepit with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of varicose veins; then cauterize around them using small puncturing caustics."
"But if you wish to perform the cauterization with a hot iron, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and press it on the middle point of the varicose vein until it penetrates the cord."
"And if the cautery in that place is put on too strongly, so that the course of the vein is alleviated; and then cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter 52."
"On cauterization of corrosive substances."
"Corroding corruption wanders through the limbs, which corrodes them as fire consumes dry wood."
"If you wish to cauterize that corrosion with fire, then heat the iron instruments accordingly, both small and large ones according to what is appropriate for that area being corroded."
"And similarly cauterize it thoroughly within so that you may eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining."
"And leave that alone for three days, and then dress the cauterized areas solely with oil mixed with salt so that all scars may be eradicated and all corruption."
"And afterward treat it with engendering flesh."
"But if after three days the flesh does not grow back healthy and uncorrupted, then you should repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted areas."
"And sometimes corrosion is treated with acute medicine, for it serves as a means to cauterize instead of fire." "But nonetheless cautery by fire is the most gentle remedy."
"And I have already spoken of the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you begin."
**Chapter 53.**
**On Cautery for Wounds and Similar Conditions.**
Often seen in the parts left by the sick foot that is called claw, and it is a thick, solid cause which presses on the foot; and cautery in these cases follows two manners: namely cautery with fire and cautery with cold water.
Cautery with fire is done using a cautery device similar to the shape of a vulture's feather quill, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the claw on each side, and it should have fine edges.
Then pause the heat of the cautery device on the claw and then slowly move your hand with the cautery device around the circumference of the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw. Leave that for three days until it begins to scar over Then apply a poultice made of crushed wild mallows mixed with salt on that area and leave the poultice overnight, because it will draw out its roots.
Then treat the location with an ointment made from fatty tissue until it is healed.
And if it does not improve, and often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery with cold water in those cases. Take a canula made of bronze or iron or vulture feather, and place it on the claw; then pour a little cold water into the canula, and hold your hand still, pressing the edge of the canula onto the root of the claw while allowing the cold water to flow through the opening at the front of the root of the claw. Wait for a moment until you feel the bite of the cold water for about an hour, then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
Do likewise to the others until all of them are eradicated from your body.
Then cleanse those pustules where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with an ointment that causes the flesh to grow.
Chapter LIV
On cautery for trembling.
When someone has trembling due to inflammation of the nerves or fever caused by heat, or for another similar reason, then you should perform cautery on them with four cauteries or five, placed on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also place a cautery on the sole of their foot and on their stomach, using an olive-sized cautery.
And may his trembling cease, and may his health be restored quickly from the burning illness.
Chapter LV
On cautery for accidental wounds of the body
When the body is wounded with accidental wounds, and there are pustules or cracks that have been formed from corrupted and thick matter, then at the beginning of the appearance it should be cauterized on top of the fistula head with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, the extremity of which has been burned in fire; or with long roots of resinous herbs; or with a lenticular cautery.
And thereafter, as often as it appears, it should be cauterized in the same manner at the beginning of its expulsion; and they should not be believed to be healed until the excess has been disrupted and expelled from them.
But nonetheless, it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI
"Treatment of accidental blood flux by incision using a cautery."
"In places where blood vessels are seen that are cut due to plague or wounds, or during the incision of abscesses or cautery of limbs, they seem similar and it is difficult to remain calm."
"Therefore, when something like this happens, at once put your hand on the wound and press firmly until that moment when you see that the blood flow has stopped."
"And appropriately pause in the fire the olive-sized cauteries, large and small, by number, and exhale over those until they are hot enough."
"And appropriately take one of them, small or large according to the place and wound where the artery has been torn open. Place it on that vein quickly once you have removed your hand, and keep the cautery pressed until the bleeding stops."
"And if the blood is still being expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove your hand and press the cautery, then immediately take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this until the bleeding has stopped."
"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and let it come close but not too close to the wound or cause harm."
"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by compressing it alone, especially if the artery is large. There are four methods to achieve this:
"Yet he who administers restriction decently to him with lamentation and with stricture by means of cloth or positioning of causes burning and similar, does not cause harm but helps."
"If there is some need elsewhere, and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then perform with caution the said operation on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that there will be great tension inside which will stop the blood from escaping its upper part; and over the artery do not remove it; and over the artery sprinkle cold water well rubbed to make the blood thicken and coagulate. And also consider whether cautery or medicine is necessary."
"On incision, perforation, wounds, and of phlebotomy and bloodletting, and their like."
"We have said in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is suitable and medicine burns."
"And you will proceed in this chapter in the same way as before, so that it may be understood by whoever asks about it."
"And first of all, know this: in this chapter is included everything that was said in the first chapter on cautery."
"And therefore it is necessary to be very careful in the operation which is discussed in this chapter, since many lives are lost there due to evacuation with blood." "And of all these, fear and trembling accompany them, and most often death follows."
"And I warn you not to fall into that which is uncertain, for sometimes it happens that one takes on the ways of men who have very harmful habits." "And among them there are some who take on the disease of the other person, and it is easy for death to come from that."
"And among them there are some who give you their wealth and sayings, and you await health with them, but their disease is harmful."
"And therefore do not consent to that person who comes to you with this habit; let your caution be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume anything about it unless you have certain scientific knowledge which proves it, and for which successful outcome is praised."
"And in the treatment of all your diseases use prognosis and indication of that which turns towards health, for in it you will find assistance in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory."
"Oh, my son, may God inspire his understanding within you and not take away from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand."
"And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into chapters according to what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization and treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may ease for you what you ask about and what you need."
Chapter One.
"Concerning the Treatment of Water Retention in the Head of Infants."
"You should know that this disease often occurs in infants at birth and when the midwife squeezes the head of the infant without its softness."
"And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes which are not known."
"But I have not seen this disease except in infants; and among all those whom I saw, death took them away, and for that reason it seems to me that there is no hope in such cases."
"And I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and its head was so swollen that it could not cease on account of the greatness of its head, and more than the humidity increased until death occurred."
"And this humidity either accumulates between the skull and the brain or accumulates above the brain on the outside of the cranium."
"For if the operation is performed in that case where the humidity is between the skull and the brain, and the aposteme is small, then you should cut into the middle of the head with a slit in the latitude, and let the length of the slit be about two digits so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:"
"And therefore if humidity is more augmented and the boil is larger, then there are two incisions to be made in this manner:"
"And if the moisture is gone from his eyes, it is a sign that he has opened his mouth wide and water comes out when you press those parts inside with your fingers, but not from him swallowing." "Therefore, you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
"and near the incision remove all moisture; and around the incisions strengthen with cloths and cotton wool; and on the fifth day pour over it a mixture of wine and oil, and then untie the bandage and dress the wound with tent-shaped compresses and ointments, and wrap the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed."
"And there is another manner of incision, which you consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water, for sometimes it is greater in the occiput or in the front or on the right or left side; therefore attend with the incision where the boil appears and the gathering of water, and do thus according as it seems best to you."
"And be sure that you do not cut the artery, and if blood flows abundantly, let the patient die because of that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
"Chapter second."
"When there occur ulcers or tumors in the eyes or ears, and it has lasted a long time, and the cure of medicines does not help, then the last cure for this is the incision of those two arteries."
"And therefore when you wish to incise those that the sick person has under his head, and first rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each side above the places which are near the ears below, and they are hidden except in some men."
"And therefore indicate on the artery with a thread, and then incise each one with a scalpel of each sharp point with incision entering into the bone, and let this be done through the width of the head."
"And if you wish, insert the scalpel within the artery and cut that one with incisions at the points above."
"And let the length of the incision be about two of those points, for when any vein is incised blood exits with pulsatile egression, which flows forth by frequent flow."
"But if the artery does not appear to your satisfaction, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three points, and indicate with a thread, and then incise into the bone."
"And as much blood should be let out as is necessary for the illness, and sometimes more or less is drawn out, and all this depends on the quantity that appears of the strength of the illness and thepletion of the artery."
"And therefore consider the wound, and if there remains some cause of the phlegm on the bone, then incise that in order that it may not turn into a cauterizing abscess."
"And therefore strengthen the wound with cotton and linen cloth bandages, and then cure it with ointment within until it is healed."
"Chapter III."
"On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples."
"When there occurs an old migraine or sharp catarrh, due to humid heat and quality in the skin of the temples, or if it is old and violent and resembles those, and it is treated with medicinal remedies but does not improve, then we have recourse to this for these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown."
"And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the sick person shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and understand where the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the violence of rubbing."
"And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you." "And then take the scalpel of which this is the form:" "And then cut the cord with that one with ease until you reach the artery; and then strike in it and extract that one at its upper points until you extract that from the cord and uncover that of the tunics which are near to that one, on every point."
"But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that one with the extremity of a needle, and then incise one point according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not incised the blood will not rise up at all."
"And then evacuate blood from three to four pints."
"And if the artery is large, then tie that one in two places with doubled strong thread of cedar or with long cords, and do not cause it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and there will be no flow of blood."
"And then incise the superfuosity that is between two bandages; and do this at that hour or another."
"And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone with a small cautery on its extremities until incisions are made and it will serve instead of that same operation."
"It is better not to perform this operation if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion because cauterization helps those causes that contribute to fine humidity, and therefore it is better in judgment."
"And therefore in the extraction of arteries that appear at the ancient wound site, powders should be gently applied to it and then cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with ointments until it is healed."
"If while performing another operation there occurs bleeding from the artery, then stop that blood flow either with cauterization or apply pressure to the wound site and strengthen your hand until the blood flow is stopped." "If none of those causes are present to you, then press your finger on the place until the bleeding stops, and bore the place with cold water from vigorous rubbing until the sharpness subsides, and strengthen it as necessary."
"It is easier in extracting an artery to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two teeth because you have seen both places beforehand, and then quickly ignite each one separately so that they reach the bone and incise the vein at two places in order that it may be elongated between its extremities because it is not completely consolidated by this cautery."
"This is the form of the cautery:"
"And let the sharpness of the two teeth be like this:" "But if they have a smaller sharpness than two teeth is better because if they are very sharp it approaches each rubbing too closely and does not cut the flesh with speed."
"Therefore since they have some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut gently."
"And this operation is better than all others and also easier."
"And let the space between two teeth be equal to the thickness of the finger."
"Chapter Four"
"About the cure of eyes with acute and acid tears from eyelids."
"When acid tears flow, and it is the body of those veins which are above the top of the head that is affected, and you do not find in this any cause for medical cure, sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they seem to feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were the crawling of ants, and their eyes are weakened, moistened so much that even the hairs of their eyelids are wet, and the skin is scratched by the sharpness of the tears, ancient doctors are most skilled in the treatment of these afflictions, and this treatment is not done with a simple cure."
"You command the patient to raise their eyebrows and then carefully make three incisions in the forehead, equally spaced according to its length." "And if the length of each incision is too short: the first should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little below the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side."
"And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are located on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws." "And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers' breadth."
"And if you have a dry sponge or cloth cut into pieces with which you can wipe away the blood."
"Then insert the spatula of two pointed extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision:" "Which refers to the division of temples entering into the second incision." "Excise everything along this line which is between two incisions with the saw which lies upon the bone, and immediately make this second incision enter into the second incision." "And immediately remove this spatula and insert it into the primary incision again with another tool called a cutting spoon, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And pause the cut at that sharp edge close to the attached flesh along the line, and at the bone's edge inside it, and employ this space that reaches the middle fissure, and sever with it all the vessels descending from the head to the ears."
"Let the incision continue along that line until this point is reached, and immediately make it enter into the other fissure."
"And when enough blood has flowed out, express the places where the clots of blood have gathered."
"And immediately pause in each fissure where there is old bone, and lay upon those powders compounded with wine and oil of vitriol, so that there may not follow a purulent ulcer."
"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or decoction, and immediately cure it with Basilicon ointment with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds may be healed."
"Chapter Five"
"On the treatment of headaches and earache arising from defects inside the head."
"When someone suffers from a continuous headache and there is often pain in the ears, and they are weak, with debilitated eyesight, inflamed eyelids with loss of eyelashes, and severe, sharp pain in the forehead with consequent external pressure, you should know that these symptoms arise because matter and catarrh do not come out except from tiny veins originating inside."
"And the best treatment in this case is to have the patient wash his forehead, and immediately make an incision in it at the middle point of the forehead, about a finger's width across (beginning with the left temple and extending to the right temple; and let the incision go deep into the bone; and lengthen your hand through the temples' muscles which are hard and thick from chewing), until the bone is exposed."
"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and immediately fill in between the two lips of the incision with old bone powder or linen." "And immediately sprinkle on top with powders compounded of wine and oil, so that there may not follow a purulent ulcer."
"And when you have tied that up and afterwards when the ulcer has decreased, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where flesh has grown back over it, and immediately dress it with a drying remedy which causes the flesh to grow again, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together and make an plaster from them, and apply it to these wounds to promote natural healing."
"Chapter Six"
"On the treatment of earache."
"The cause of earache is one of four kinds: either it is due to mineral matter or something similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or it is due to plant matter like chickpeas or broad beans, or it is due to fluid matter such as watery discharge and sour wine and their likes, or some small creature."
"And when there is earache due to mineral matter or some other similar cause that does not fit into nor grow within the ear, and the ear is closed up, then apply warm oil of violet or sesame seed oil drops into it, and immediately administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with condimentum and plug his nostrils against the arrival of sneezing." "And then apply to the opening of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear outwards from above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes."
"And if it has not been forgotten, then administer its extraction with the instrument called 'epicycled gesture', of which this is the form:"
"And if it has been forgotten with a gesture, then good. But if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of few doublings."
"And if it has not been forgotten by this, then make a cannula of brass and insert its extremity into the passage of the ear, and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula may be opened." "And then extract it with a strong breath of air, because many times with this method we have succeeded."
"But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take some salt of alum or sometimes prepared with which birds' chicks are taken by the foot, and place that on the tip of the arrow, and immediately wrap around that well-placed point." "And then insert that into the passage of the ear with ease, and immediately remove the ear from moisture."
"And if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have mentioned, then cut off that before it results in a purulent ulcer or spasm."
"The manner of cutting it off is that you first sanctify the sick vein of the temporal vein and extract the blood according to its virtue, and then make a cut between your thumb and index finger and turn the ear upwards, and finish with a small incision in the ridge of the ear over where it was pressed." "And let the incision be crescent-shaped so that it reaches the stone, and when the stone is loosened, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments. And immediately sew up the incision at that time with speed, and dress it until it is healed."
"And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the hairs that grow and swell, then administer its cure and extraction. But if it does not obey your attempt to remove it, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:" "and use it to perform the excision of that hair which has fallen into the ear."
"But do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place many pieces on it, and then extract them with hooks or epicycled gestures, or with excision as mentioned above, because its extraction is facilitated."
"But when water enters the ear, it is necessary that the patient sneeze with condimentum at first, and fill his ear with some warm cloth, and jog over that ear in which there is water. And if it is not forgotten by this, then good. But if not, then take many thin pebbles and lentils according to the length of the finger, heat them on the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of them into the passage of his ear and shake on one side of that part and strike with another pebble over the pebble which is inside the ear." "So do not cease doing this until all the water has been removed."
"So do not cease doing this until all the water has been removed." "And if the water is not removed by this means, then take some paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until most of it burns."
"And then put in another cotton and do this many times until all the water has been removed, and then clean it out with a cannula as mentioned above about the stone extractor."
"However, in the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is of small size, thus push and release it; but if it is of great size which appears at the entrance of the nose, then administer its extraction with gestures and onions, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that occur in the ear."
"However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, if you cure it with what we have said in this division and in the treatise on distillations, but your cure does not succeed, then you should examine the ear towards the sunlight."
"And therefore if there appears any cause of worms here, then extract it with delicate gestures or with subtle tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula like this: narrow below and wide above, of which this is the form:" "And insert the delicate extremity of it into the ear according to the quantity that it can suffer; and then suck with it strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled."
"But if this does not obey to your attempt, then plug the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which are already described in the ancient cure for worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations."
"And this should be your method with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form:" "And make it of silver or bronze, narrow below, with a small hole, and flat above."
"And therefore let it be made in such a way that what is contained within the concavity of the cannula may come out here where it will be necessary." "And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it neatly around the extremity of it; then pour oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or whatever medicinal substance you wish into the cannula — which is in the ear —; then insert the wick with its cotton on top, and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the ailment feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should be first cauterized with fire a little bit." "And see to it that what you distill into the ear is not too hot, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this."
"Chapter VII."
"Of the treatment of obstruction of ears."
Some children sometimes exit from the bellies of their mothers unperforated, and this has happened to some men, opacity in the meat of the ear for plague or for flesh born there; and this opacity sometimes is made in the front of the tube of the ear which does not conceal the appearance, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
And that which happened on his forehead, which did not comprehend the appearance, was in those with major dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that one where it succeeds the appearance, you must pause the ear of the sick towards the sun and look at that. And therefore if sometimes opacity appears, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is its shape:
If the extremity of it in which is little the latitude, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two sides even for that it does not make harm to the ear.
And therefore if the opacity is for flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should take that with fine tweezers and cut that violently until all the flesh is taken out.
And if opacity is on the front of the ear, then take a subtle ray of sun and warm that with fire a little bit, and approach that to the meat of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt opacity with that which the sick takes with facility, because of gravity of hearing, force the oppression of it with facility; and take care that not plague the nerves of the ear.
And approach in the ear wrap of it according to the quantity of the width of the wick which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do that for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plug; or what takes and inserts that in ears and pulverizes over it thrice treated and uses of it; and if sometimes the ear is already apostematized, then it is necessary that you extract the wick and replace that with another wick which you will wrap in cerote which is made with roasted olive oil, until the apostema caut be given out; and then cure that until it is healed.
But if it happens blood flow, then immerse and wring out a cloth in fresh water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
About the care of athezil (inflamed eyelids)
"Dry up the excess moisture that sometimes collects on the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are dry."
"Therefore you should have those tweezers or forceps, and separate those hairs from their roots, and then carefully pause on the locations indicated."
"If blood flows with pain, then cauterize that spot with a small silver-tipped cautery."
"However, the best cauterization is one that closes up incisions and prevents them from reopening when there remains some cause of their appearance; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned and do not return."
"Chapter IX."
"Cure for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes."
"Sometimes it happens in the eyelids of the eyes that some cause appears, which resembles hardness and firmness, and therefore it is called swelling."
"And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the lower eyelid and above it."
"Therefore the operation in such cases is to consider whether the swelling is proceeding from within, appearing through the eyelid and swollen all over; and the cause of it is light."
"Therefore make an incision over that with a scalpel along its length, and carefully explore the whole area with facility until it evacuates, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off."
"And if the swelling is large, then adjust it with suturing; and cure it until it is healed."
"And if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it."
"And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid inside, then evert the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage only, without making any incision, and press it all over; and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, then there is no cause for it."
"And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the place with whatever heals until it is healed."
Chapter X
Of the treatment of inflammation in the upper eyelid.
The eyelid is inflamed and this condition begins in the tunics of the eyelids, especially in children. It aggravates their eyes and affects their sight; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun due to tears flowing from them.
And therefore those ones always wipe their faces with their hands and sleep with their faces covered. And so the eyelids of theirs are constantly wet and inflamed, and there is a threatening danger apparent in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel a hard tumor within them.
And there is a certain manner of operation in those who suffer from this illness: they place their head in the hollow of their hand and hold cloth over it and around their eye. Then they make a circle according to the amount that contains earth of all parts, and they place this on that and press with their fingers throughout so that the tumor is aggregated in the middle of the circle. And then they finish in the middle of that moisture with a cautery incidentally through a fissure by the latitude, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in trepanation.
But before you cut the thread all the way through until you reach the tumor, for in most cases it proceeds by fissure according to the shape of a grayish-white spot.
Therefore, take out that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the parts before and wound around between the right hand and left hand until it is separated.
And be careful not to adjust in the fissure lest with the cautery you reach the eye and burn it.
But if you do not see your tumor at the beginning of the fissure, but rather adjust in the fissure with facility until it proceeds, then take that out as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and wine vinegar and place them on the location and rinse those with powders.
And some say that they crush salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure lest what remains of that moisture
And then treat that until it is healed.
But if you happen to burn the location with the cautery, then treat that with cataplasms of celandine until it is healed.
Chapter XI
Of manners of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are born tumors due to pressure from the growth of eyelashes and they become old, then those touch the eye and cause ways of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue whereby that may be the cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching of the eye, and it is cured in four manners: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cauteries; or it is performed by incision and suture; or by cantharides according to what I shall say.
And therefore it is necessary to place the head of the illness on its seat; moreover, turn over the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned over, well; but if not, insert a needle in that in which there is hair of the parted pus below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and that be — close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it over with the ray.
And then make an incision in the parted inside of the eyelid below the hairs with a cautery incident on the greater lacrimal entering to the lesser lacrimal; and then take out the thread and place cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and then sew up above the eyelid with needle and be as it were like a fig leaf.
But nevertheless the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for that is already diversified among people, for there are those who need that it be incised much from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then make with the cautery over the two lines which you have sewn, and begin from the greater lacrimal entering to the lesser lacrimal. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs such as is the thickness of a grain
And then put the needle in one of the two corners of the thread, and then tear out that entirely, and then join with the suture the two lips with wax or thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of threads over both brows with some adhesive causes if you wish to do so, but otherwise do not bother.
And then leave the suture of the threads inside for three days or four, and then cure that
And if you wish, leave the plaster without suture, and cure that with what dries and constricts, for the eyelid is elevated because of the sealing of the plaster and the aggregation of pus; but suture is better. Therefore this is what the ancients say about touching.
But nevertheless if there should be solicitude concerning the illness, it is of good operation and there is not fear in him.
And there is another manner of touching, and it is that you sew over the eyelid like a fig leaf, and then lift up the eyelid with three needles separated and gathered thus:
"However, if this is not possible, hold the nails, and if it's unequal, then take a needle with thread, place it in the middle of the figure, insert another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct. Adjust these threads evenly between your fingers, and then gently raise your hand upwards, raising the entire chain equally as we have advised."
"Then adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and care for the area that has been healed."
"However, if an abscess occurs after your incision or fissure, lance that abscess with a cautery and its surroundings, and seal it."
"And sometimes the edges of the eyelid become inverted, so you should use what we have mentioned about incision for that purpose; but suture in such a way that is more natural."
"To cut with scissors it should be done in this way:" "And if you invert the eyelid and incise the figure that is described below according to what I have explained, then next make two thin needles or two thin probes whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the spatula." "And once you have incised at both ends where you have the threads."
"Next, gently pass each thread underneath the eyelid edge that protrudes excessively, then tie both threads tightly at their respective ends, and leave it like this for a few days. This is because the chain will die from the tightness and be rejected, and whatever was inserted will naturally fall back into place."
"But if it has taken too long, then break it with forceps, and afterwards care for the wound until it is healed."
"So when it has healed, the eyelid will be elevated and the hairs will not irritate."
"And here is how you make those needles which you should make like this:" "And have the length and width neither more nor less."
"Chapter 12."
"About elevating irritating hairs on the eyelid using a needle when the hair is hard."
When it is by supernatural causes, harsh and rough and piercing the humors, then the operation on him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in this vein of cedar wood and lion's bone, and then adjust his limbs with great subtlety. And let the length of the needles be like the measure of one palm.
Then you shall quickly place another subtle needle next to it, and reuse its ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head on the tie-se pillow, near the sun for your work to be declared, as it is a subtle and delicate operation.
Then insert the needle into the skin of the adjusted part which has required engraving and make it penetrate swiftly under the eyelid before extracting it from above the natural skin.
Then pull out the skin upwards and insert it into the incisions, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
Then take your hand away so that the skin may dry out with the incision on the eyelid, keeping the natural skin outside.
But if the skin is incised and not cut away, then you shall cut away from the sides with the needle which you have prepared with that, so that it may be cut away from underneath.
Then cover it with a bandage, looking at the wound, for then you shall cut away the incision and the needle, and close each one carefully and clean the wound, leaving the stitches in place for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows good flesh on top of it.
And if the skin is too short, then you shall adjust one long hair from the natural hairs and elevate it with that, or let it lie there until it lengthens somewhat and is elevated.
Chapter XIII
Of the treatment of inflammation which occurs on top of the eyelid
When inflammation occurs on the eyelid, it is characterized by contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, either on the right or left side, due to improper healing of wound or section or cautery. This condition is called "leporina" and this inflammation may be natural or accidental. It can occur as a result of improper healing of wounds, sections or cauteries or by appearing similar to those who are affected by it.
"The manner of the operation on him is that you should cut away that solidification and separate the lips of it, and place in it what is between those a cloth soaked in water, and bind them together so they may be healed."
"And you should use remedies for him from causes which dry and constrict, because if you do this it will return to its former state worse than ever before."
"Use on it remedies which soften, such as fenugreek, and cook with water in which celery seeds are boiled and poured over, or liquid diacylglycerol made from some of the oils, and immerse the cloth in that and treat him with it."
"And the treasure of your cure is that you should perforate with everything that is not solid according to the form that was at the beginning."
"And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of chilblains which do not return to their former state."
"Chapter XIV."
"Of the cure for chilblains that occur in the left eyelid."
"This chilblain which occurs in the left eyelid, which is truly called a chilblain; and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental."
"But accidental ones are caused by blows, cuts, burns, or other similar causes."
"And the way to operate on it is that you should take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct into the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
"And then extend the flesh at its edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and cut it open with a broad spatula." "And then if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, that is good. But if not, take a thread and place it in the slit, and with it turn back the eyelid and close both slits on the left side of the eyelid."
"And let the ends of both slits be at two angles of the incision which you have made, so that they may meet and form an angle when they come together, making a proper shape."
"And this figure is called in Greek: 'the lambda'."
"And then cut off the flesh from there by the amount on the inside of the left corner of it, as much as secures the eyelid."
"And then join together the separated parts and sew them up with a thread of wool; and then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and compresses until it is healed."
"And if chilblains occur again due to a slit, stitch or burn, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat slit over the skin of the eyelid as has been described before." "And then separate with a compress between two lips according to what we have said."
"In summary of the sermon on the treatment of chilblains when they are above or below, that which occurs in its operation, according to what has been prepared about its shape, is in various shapes."
"And the skilled artisan always prepares in every possible way for each manner that is possible to him so that he may bring back the shape to its natural form or close to it, and this disease according to what is suitable for it with regard to the operation and tools in the best conditions."
"Chapter .xv."
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea."
When this condition occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified upwards with the albumen of the eye, and prevented from its natural movement and functions, then you must insert the tip of a needle underneath the eyelid and raise it up, or extend it with tweezers.
And then you cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which should not have too sharp an edge, taking care to make it blunt enough so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Remove the scalpel carefully so as not to hurt the eye with its sharpness.
Make your incision such that it easily cuts through the adhesion, ensuring that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and that all adhesions are healed.
Then you apply saltwater to the eye, with which you rinse it; or distilled water dissolved in honey.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye using a cotton swab dipped in egg albumin, and apply a compress soaked in egg white to the eye. On the third day, use healing agents to promote healing of the wound.
Chapter XVI
On Incision of Nail and Removal of Carnal Protrusion from Lacrimal Ducts
You should know that there are two kinds of nails: one is nerve-like, similar to hard, fine matter; the other is not nerve-like and resembles congealed white humor. When you cut this latter type with a knife, it can be easily gripped with tweezers and then removed without the tweezers getting stuck inside.
Both kinds of nails begin only in the larger lacrimal ducts and gradually increase, covering the eye and preventing light and movement of the eye.
To operate for the incision of this nail, the patient should hold their head still and look up. Then open the eye widely with your fingers and lift the eyelid with your hand. Using tweezers with little duplication, grasp the nail and gently pull it upwards at its ends. Then take a needle and thread through it a horsehair or cowhair or oxhair or similar strong hair. Fold the tip of the needle and insert it into the middle of the nail. Then pass the needle through the nail and grasp it with forceps. Gently pull the nail upwards at its ends, and carefully remove the lateral edge of the nail that covers the pupil using the thread. And so you continue removing it until the end is reached.
Then incise the remaining nail at its root using fine scissors or small forceps. This will release the natural lacrimal tissue and prevent continuous tearing from occurring due to the incision.
And sometimes the nail can be removed with just one pair of forceps or with forceps alone, as we have described. The form of the spoon-shaped knife used for this purpose is as follows:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the spoon and avoid breaking it. Also ensure that the pupil is not pierced.
After making the incision, apply a little salt water or rosewater to wash it and leave it for another day. Then rinse it with clean water and dress it until healed.
If the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle or grasp it with tweezers, then sometimes this type of nail can be treated with medications. In such cases, follow the methods described in the division (treatment) section.
If you wish to incise the nail, first open the patient's eye and take a fine spoon-shaped knife made of sharp steel with a point like this: Sharp and subtle. If sometimes the nail is rarefied and condensed, and adheres to its root, then distill some of your saliva into the eye with rosewater or with boiled water or salt water. Then close the eye for another day.
Then continue the operation until all of what remains is removed from the eye. But if a counter granuloma has formed in the eye, then leave it alone and treat the granuloma at the beginning until healed.
Then continue your operation on that nail until it is healed.
"Suspend the eyelid with a hook to avoid great harm. Incise the upper one first, and do not cut too deeply to prevent tears from flowing."
"And subsequently, distill water into the lachrymal sac through a small opening so that it may be healed."
"Chapter XVII"
"The incision of an abscess and about what is born from attached flesh in the eye."
"Sometimes in the eyes of some people, flesh is born that grows over the pupil, or approaches it and presses between the eyelids, forcing them apart, like the petals of a flower."
"First, operate on the head where the patient rests their chin. Then open their eyes and collect all that flesh with appropriate hooks. Remove it with forceps or basket, then cut away the flesh at its beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, taking care not to damage the eye during your operation."
"And your incision should be made with the same scalpel that we have recommended for nail cutting, or with small forceps, according to what comes next in this chapter."
"Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, fill the eye with finely ground salt or distilled powder like those used in corrosive medicines. Then apply a bandage made of egg white to ensure that no infection occurs."
"And if there remains some cause for inflammation and infection appears, and you fear an infectious abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat that abscess with whatever will heal it. Then repeat your operation until it is healed, and do likewise for any attached flesh that occurs in the eye of this sort."
"However, you should avoid all care of the eye by means of herbs or any other accidental way. Do not use iron instruments or put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation."
Chapter XVIII
On collection of cataract in the eye.
"Know that veins become hardened on the hip and hinder its movement; alleviate this condition over several days."
"Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the hip in which there is sciatica is strong and does not have another ailment called sciatica. Then collect that sciatica."
"And you must command the patient to put their head on your shoulder, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and that ounce should be of fine doubled thread."
"or two ounces gradually in a body like this:"
"Then bind those veins with fine forceps, carefully and gently, and wipe away the blood little by little until you see those veins become detached from the hip and turned over."
"And be careful not to cut the hip with the sharp ends of the spatula. And if your operation is done in the midday before the sun, and you are firm in your operation, do not cut anything but those veins."
"And when you have completed this, then distill on the hip chief white or rose water because with its sharpness it will corrode what is detached from the sciatica."
"But if this is not possible for you to do all at once, then plaster it all with that which relieves the pain of sciatica and leave him like that for a few days until the pain is calmed and assured against inflammation."
"And then iterate upon it according to what seems best to you until he is healed."
"And this is the form of the forceps:"
"Chapter XIX."
"On the reduction of nasal fractures."
"When you treat fractures of the nose with cautery or with burning medicine according to what is prescribed in its narration and it does not heal, then do not engage in it unless you cut above the swelling when it reaches maturity, and remove all the humidity that is in it until the bone becomes visible."
"And then, when the bone becomes visible and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:"
"And it is called 'rough head' and should be made of iron, and the head should be round like this: pierced with points for piercing with a file or awl for fine piercing (as in the following form)."
"And place that upon the corrupted part of the bone and then turn it between your fingers and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped."
"And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes."
"Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good skin has been produced in it, and the flesh has detached from the bone and remains like that for forty days, and there is no renewal nor inflammation nor any accident in it, then you will know that it is healed."
"If not, then do not engage in it unless you reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and that is when you uncover the second bone with iron or with burning medicine, and when the bone becomes visible, then take tweezers of this form:"
"The tip of the iron should be triangular, and its stem should be thinly tapered to the tip as shown here."
"And then place that upon the bone and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little away from the helmet, and then turn your hand with the tweezers until all of the bone enters, and he will feel pain because you find vent issuing forth there when you have his hand."
"Therefore, then restore the area with astringent drying medicines as you have learned."
"Therefore, when the skin is healed and the area has become hardened, then the matter that flowed out to the parts outside returns to the nose; therefore, this is gentle about the pain."
"And Chapter XX."
"On the reduction of the prominence of the helmet."
"When the helmet is prominent with its totality and no harm or diminution occurs in its appearance, then it is necessary that you alleviate the pain, and then follow this: place vents on the nape of the neck without scarification and suck well; and then place upon the helmet a liniment made of aconite and aloe and frankincense and tragacanth gum, and then apply poultices to the helmet with hot powders."
"And the manner of the powders is that you take drags of lions' teeth and each drag should be folded into four pleats, and make them thus."
"And then place those upon one another according to the quantity that the helmet requires." "And then place upon them a hard cloth with strong binding, and repeat the cupping with suction without scarification, and then remove the cups and leave the helmet bare day and night."
"But if meantime the bandage becomes softened, then it must be made tight again."
"And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
"And if the helmet is already reduced, that is good. But if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed."
"And Chapter XXI."
"On the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the eye."
"When there is a disturbance in the tunic of the eye and it becomes prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, and appears rough like this shape of a man, and you wish to incise it, then the operation here is as we have recommended: that you insert the needle into the prominence of the vein from below above, and then insert another needle with doubled thread on the side of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the doubled thread and lift away with it the part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and pull that tight."
"And then extract the needle and place upon the helmet wool infused in albumen of a fowl and leave it there until the thread with the vein falls out."
"And then treat the helmet with that which comforts it until the wound is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that the whole part adheres with a circle of cloth onto the helmet's prominent eminence, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the front of the helmet, and runs the albumen humor, and descends the helmet and enters immediately."
"And then pull until it is healed."
"And Chapter XXII."
"On the treatment of inflammation of the eye."
"This illness called inflammation of the eye is nothing but heat that adheres to the helmet like descending water, and it is not this."
"But the manner of treating this is that you make the illness cease upon the prepared and straight saddle, and then take your head in both hands and move it until you see the heat coming to the parts below, and then dry it so that it does not descend, and close the light, and the illness sees its causes as if seeing."
"And if it does not descend below, know that it is water."
"But if the descent of the heat is not prepared with what we have said, then make the illness cease between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and wound it upon the skin surrounding a little below the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (as seen), until the heat is expelled."
"Therefore when it is expelled, then distill upon the helmet water infused with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey."
And then it should be treated with other causes until it is healed.
Capítulo XXII
Of the treatment of descending water from the head.
We have already spoken of the kinds of waters in division and which are suitable for boring with clear speech.
Then you must place the patient between your thighs on a cushion and grasp their head with both hands, pressing firmly.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if the water is for the left eye, or your right hand if it's for the right eye.
And then with your right hand take some salt if the eye is left, or with your left hand if it's right.
And then place the tip of the salt near the crown of the eye for the thickness of a ray in the white of the eye from the direction of the tear duct, and then press the salt gently with your hand on that.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye until you feel that the salt has reached the bottom of the tear duct.
And the measure of the path of the salt should be like the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and that is the crown of the eye; for you shall see with that the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place the salt into the location where the water is, and then gently squeeze it once or twice, and then if the water descends quickly, at that moment you will see the illness about which this person has been complaining quickly disappear from their eye, along with the salt.
And then pause for a moment; and if the water has descended, then gently squeeze again but be careful that the salt is not spilled.
And then when it has ceased and does not descend any further, then gently remove the salt with ease, and then turn it slowly with your hand again and again, and then dissolve a little of finely ground rock salt in water and with that wash the inside of the eye; and then place something outside the eye to stop it, such as cotton soaked in rose oil and alum and lint and bind it thus onto the eye.
But we who are of this time pause on that which is written with white albumen.
And if you do not succeed in inserting the salt into the eye due to its hardness - for it is one of those men whose eye is very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called an "alberid" and which has this shape:
And then pierce with that the conjunctiva, but do not push your hand too far in and do not hesitate to make a way for the salt to reach its subtle location.
And then insert the salt as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to sleep in a room with the lights off where they can lie on their back without any movement.
And pause the nature of the water so that its nature is clear and do not move their head to either side or up or down during this time.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement in place on the third day.
And then untie that one from that darkened room and expose them to the open air view, let them see some things, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not do this during the hours of darkness or immediately after a bath. Be careful to avoid doing this for someone who has an abundance of water, because water can play gently on the large and vehement eye.
But if an abscess forms, then you must remove the bandage from the eye on the seventh day and correct it with something that will cause the abscess to burst.
Then uncover their eye and pause on the face of their mouth so that they can regulate the movement of their gaze up and down for a few days while remaining in the darkened room.
And then gradually lead them out of that room and expose them to things slowly.
Know that in alchemy, the apprentice is not exempt from having vision some times, and therefore you should be bold about performing the operation.
And it has already come to our knowledge that some of those who are knowledgeable in alchemy have said that one should make fire in the Alchemical Furnace called "Magdara" pierced with which water is sucked up.
But however we have not seen this done in our land nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients that this has been perfected; and it is possible that this may be a new thing.
And these are the forms of the species of "magdara" so that they can be understood by those who do not know them:
And they are made of brass or iron properly, and they have these extremities with this triangular subtlety, the extremity sharp thus as that is the shape.
Chapter XXIV
On the treatment of flesh torn in the nose.
When in the nose there are diverse pieces of flesh attached from which one cause is that it is assembled like a scorpion with many feet, or like a polyp with weight; and this illness is called "polyp" because it resembles that fish represented. And its flesh is cancerous, pale, of dark color; but the lion's flesh is not of dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion-like but not fraudulent or cancerous flesh, you should squeeze the illness between your hands and put it in the sun, and draw out its moisture and cut off those pieces of flesh. And then extract that from the openings of its exterior, and then cut what you have comprehended of those with a sharp subtle spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh is removed; but if there remains any cause for which amputation is possible, then remove it with one of the subtle instruments easily so that nothing remains. But if there is bleeding or an abscess forms, then pause until it stops naturally; but if they are malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that until the bleeding stops and all cavities are opened.
And then sprinkle it in the nose with wine vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is open and from it proceeds moisture into the palate, then you know that it is healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is still flesh torn on the projecting bones of the nostrils which have not received amputation.
Therefore you should then insert lead into it which has some thickness, and push it in the most of its nostrils, and pause between each push for the amount of one finger or more, and generate the illness and insert an extremity of the lead into the nose with wax or with another cause that is possible.
And after that has been done, let them throw their head backwards so that the odor reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let it be poured over their throat, for several times children at school do this action and it is an easy cause for anyone who wants to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the lead, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a suture of flesh on the holes that are in the lead, and do this until you know that the flesh is with the holes of the lead.
And then extract the lead, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of blood once a day, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a cannula of lead for seven days until it is healed.
If you intend to treat by cauterization, use the cautery.
This is the form of the purge-making instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
And make this of silver or copper, resembling a small open lantern, like a small jug, and the mouth likewise.
And if you wish, make it a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the purge-making instrument should be flat and open; have a handle on its end with which to hold it when pouring in the oil or water that you want from the saps and succulent causes.
Chapter XXV
**Of the thills or wicks that are placed at the extremities of the nose.**
Many times it happens that the eye appears in the extremities of the nose, and is enlarged and swollen during those days when much attention is paid to its care.
And for this reason you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of that, and erase everything after that. Moreover, pause over the place where cauterization or medicine burns is situated instead of it.
But if its insertion is delayed until it has become enlarged, then consider whether it is hard, thick, dark in color, and insensitive. If this is the case, do not touch that with iron because it may be a malignant carbuncle. Many times that which you have inserted into this carbuncle becomes stuck there due to great mischief on that person.
And if the carbuncle is of a reddish color and not dark in color, sometimes insertion may be possible everywhere. In this case, evacuate the morbid matter and insert without fear, and cure the place with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI
Of the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been dissolved by an ulcer or wound.
Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages (the nose, lips, or ear), little confidence should be placed in that operation, except with certain skilled individuals.
Therefore, when you encounter such a cause in someone, first examine whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood. Then immediately approximate the two lips of the wound with suture and apply proper dressing until healed.
And if the lips of the continuity have already separated and each is free from infection, then it is necessary to cut off each end of its apparent cord until there is no bleeding. And then closely approximate the two lips with suture and press them together. Then sprinkle dragon's blood powder on it and apply a poultice of diaphoretic plaster or another consolidative plaster, leaving that dressing for two or three days before removing it and replacing it. Leave it until the wound has healed by itself.
But the manner of suture is to join the edges of the continuity either with needles as recommended for abdominal closure, or else with thread in such a way that you know how to do it.
Chapter XXVII
Of the extraction of those causes that come between the two lips within wounds
Many times it happens that in the midst of the lips of wounds there are hard pimples resembling pig fat, some small and others larger.
"Therefore you should examine each of those hardnesses and divisions, and then make an incision in the place where the blood is concentrated, wash it with vinegar, and dress the wound with something that has astringent properties until it heals."
Capítulo XXVIII.
Chapter XXVIII: On the Incision of Adherent Tissue in the Gums
Often there appears on the gum adherent flesh which the ancients called albulus; therefore you should suspend it with forceps or hold it with your fingers and cut it off at its root, allowing the sound tissue to bleed freely.
And afterwards apply to the place where it has been cut a powder that is both astringent and cicatrizing.
And if that flesh returns, cut it again afterwards, and cauterize it so that it does not return again.
Capítulo XXIX.
"Due to teeth made of iron."
When the surface of the teeth in both jaws and those in front are tightly sealed with rough, sharp, thick deposits, sometimes blackened, and have green or yellow pus between them and the gum, this indicates decay and the teeth are loose.
Therefore you should seize the patient between your hands and place their head on the pillow of their bed, hold open their mouth in which those deposits appear and cause such sand-like grit to arise from them that there is no cause for any decay, and this is done with respect to blackness and yellowness and other things that are altered.
Therefore if this is what you want in the beginning of the reason, well then; but otherwise, later you should repeat the reason on those days two and three until it comes to its final statement in what you wish.
And know that teeth require various types of tools with different shapes and forms according to the preparation for your operation. And therefore choose the rasp with which you remove the tooth from within the teeth that is different from the rasp with which you scrape between the teeth in other ways. These forms of rasps should be prepared by you, as you will soon see:
Capital thirty
Extraction of teeth
But when you care for a tooth with all your skill and patience in its extraction, there is no reason why the vision should not be clear once it has been extracted, because it is a substance that becomes sublime during the extraction.
But if the patient is forced to have a tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which is the painful tooth, for often the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth, and you extract one while the pain continues until the truly diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have seen happen in barbers' operations.
Therefore, when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum completely severed, and immediately remove that with your tweezers, or with subtle forceps bit by bit until it comes out.
And then with strong forceps hold the tooth firmly for good traction or extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your thumbs so that you may have it well held that it does not move, and extract the tooth directly in such a manner that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And then if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and put it behind the tooth on all sides with ease and effort to loosen it as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is cracked or decayed, then you must fill that crack and strengthen it with the extremity of a fine wire before tightening it with forceps on that tooth.
And you must work carefully with scarification around all sides of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it or cause it to shatter apart from it, and return on the patient for greater good than the first pain of him.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity to eradicate teeth without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great illnesses upon men which are more difficult to treat than the tooth itself, and leave behind roots of removed teeth all together, or some of those, or extract it with some bones of the jaw as is often testified.
And when extracting it, wash the mouth with hot water or vinegar with salt.
And if there are flows of blood from that, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if it does not suffice that sage, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when using them.
And let them be thus shaped with grooves on the inside of the thick handle such that when you tighten with those, they are not bent, and have short extremities.
And let them be made of wrought iron, straight-edged, and on the extremities have teeth that interlock with each other for strong tightening, and sometimes the extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is wide, and they are of great force.
Chapter XXXI
Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Extraction of Bones of the Jaw that are Locked together
When you must extract a tooth that is stuck for some reason, then you should pause on the place with warm water for one or two days until that place is softened; and then introduce instruments or tweezers whose extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or wide-mouthed, in this way:
The extremities of their limbs are affected in such a way as though they were scraped or filed.
If you do not obey to this command with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut over the wound and remove all flesh and insert the instrument called thus, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And its end should be thick but short, and not bent in such a way that it does not catch.
Therefore, if the wound is forgotten because of this, it is good. And if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose forms are as follows: The first instrument has a triangular shape with some thickness at its end
The second instrument should be triangular and have a very thin tip
And then, helped with this instrument having two branches, whose shape is approximately as follows: And also with other instruments which are like teeth for cutting, because much help is obtained with this instrument which resembles a large nut, and this is its shape:
Of triangular tip bent or short, which has some thickness, and not bent in such a way that it does not catch.
And you should know that the instruments of moving teeth are also similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle craftsman finds for himself mates according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases. Because there are some diseases for which the ancients did not give or leave proper instruments because of their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken or pierced, then it should be carefully treated on that spot with whatever is convenient among the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture whose shape is as follows:
And let there be some thickness little by little, and let it be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely forgotten. And then restore the spot with appropriate medicines for that.
But if there is a small perforation in the bone, then remove that from that perforation and its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32
Of the care of prominent teeth above the others.
"When teeth emerge misaligned from their natural course due to form or are especially noticeable in women, particularly venerable elderly women; therefore, consider: if one tooth is too close to another and no shifting or ligature is possible, then extraction may be necessary. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, whose shape resembles a pig's snout, made of sharp-edged Indian iron."
"And if your incision does not cut through the tooth in three days due to its hardness, do not attempt to remove another tooth."
"If it is an erupted tooth with an eminence requiring filing, then file it using this Indian iron file, whose shape is as follows:"
"And it is entirely made of India iron and sharp-pointed; and its cutting edges are thus like a file with which teeth should be filed little by little in many days with ease, so that no other tooth is injured or damaged." "And appropriately smooth it at the end, then polish it with pumice stone."
"And if it is a tooth with a broken edge that irritates the tongue, then you should grind down that rough portion until it is smooth and flattened, so that the tongue is not injured and speech is not impeded."
"Chapter XXXIII"
"Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil."
"When teeth are broken by concussion or removal due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew their food, and you have treated it with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then it is proper to restore those that are strong with gold foil, not silver, because silver turns green over time, but gold never changes."
"And the foil should be made thin and fine according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. The method of preparation is as follows: take the foil and fold it twice between two healthy teeth, then carefully twist the folds of the foil between one or more broken teeth so that it reaches the healthy part of the other tooth." "And then continue the filling within the portion where you began, and carefully press your hand with ease and skill so that it is not broken."
"And make sure to press the foil tightly against the roots of the teeth so that it does not become loose."
"And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, gather them up at each location, and bend them down and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue." "And then press it tightly as with wax."
"But if it becomes loose or broken, then repair it or them with other foil in this same manner at all times."
"And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in this drawing:"
"And when one or two teeth return to their proper place after falling out due to concussion and have been restored as we have described, but still become broken again."
"And this is only done by skilled and knowledgeable artists."
"Sometimes it is appropriate to use bones from cattle. They are shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth has failed. It is then bound tightly as we have said, and remains there serving for a long time."
Capítulo XXXIV
Chapter XXXIV
"This ligament which sometimes prevents the tongue from moving or is naturally present but accidentally occurs due to phlegm that has already congealed."
"And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, lift their head back if necessary; elevate their tongue and carefully cut that nerve ligament according to its length until the tongue is freed from its recess."
"Moreover, if there is any hardness or firmness there, and this is due to the consolidation of phlegm, then you apply oil and cut it open along its length until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the firmness."
"And make sure that there is not too much opening of the flesh wound, and be careful not to sever any artery or cause bleeding."
"And carefully wash the wound of the incision with warm water or vinegar water or fresh water; and then leave the tongue at peace, that is, keep the patient's mouth closed in each night so that it does not become consolidated again."
"But if bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the location; but if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the location with a hot cautery that is suitable for this purpose." "And also treat it with other causes according to how it is healed."
"Chapter XXXV."
"For removal of a ranula from under the tongue."
Sometimes, a small tumor resembling a pea grows under the tongue and hinders its natural movement.
The operation involves opening the patient's mouth widely towards the sun and examining the tumor.
And if you find it to be dark colored or black, hard, and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, indicating humidity, then you should use a spoon to remove it, and carefully cut that thin sputum with scissors, cutting it entirely; but if blood comes during your operation, then pause for a moment until the bleeding stops, applying some powdered vitriol to restrict its flow.
And then return to your work until you have removed it completely with care, rinsing the wound with vinegar and salt; and heal it with another cure until it is healed.
Capítulo XXXVI
Chapter XXXVI: Extraction of Tumors from the Ears and Those Found in the Throat, as Well as Other Tumors.
When there are tumors in the throat that are swollen glands which sometimes become enlarged and protrude externally, these are called "ears," and when you treat them with water as mentioned earlier but they do not heal, then consider whether the tumor is hard, dark colored, and causes little pain. If so, do not touch it with iron.
"It is of red color and has a large root, therefore do not touch it with iron due to blood flow. Rather, let it remain until it ripens, then you shall remove it or break it apart yourself."
"If it is white in color and has a fine root, then that one should be incised."
"And before your operation, consider the condition of the abscess: whether it has already ripened and is fully ready, or if it has decreased in size with some diminution. Then make the patient lie down facing the sun, with their head towards the east, open their mouth wide, and the servant holding their tongue with a suitable instrument, whose form is as follows:"
"And it should be made of silver or brass, and be sharp like a knife."
"Then, while pressing the tongue with that instrument and exposing the abscess to you, take courage and cut into it at once, inserting the knife gently into the opening and pulling outwards as much as possible." "After that, if some of the tunics come out along with it, then immediately cut them off with this instrument, whose form is as follows:"
"After that, if some of the tunics come out along with it, then immediately cut them off with this instrument, whose form is as follows:" "And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved such that the tips of each face inward towards the other, being very sharp, and made of iron with a brass inlay."
"But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose form is as follows: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And after making one cut, make another according to this same method of incision. Then wash the wound clean with water."
"But if there is bleeding from the wound, wash it clean with water from a decoction of rosehip or myrtle leaves, adding to that any of the astringent causes at hand until the bleeding stops. Then dress the wound until it heals."
"And sometimes you may find other abscesses near those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said regarding the incision of two equal cuts."
"And now I will tell you about a woman who was afflicted with an abscess that had formed in her groin. It was dark colored and insensitive, the wound had already closed up, she was breathing with difficulty, and eating and drinking water were prohibited to her. She would have died within two days or less if something hadn't been done."
"And the abscess had grown so large that it had produced two branches that extended out through two tracks."
"I then carefully inserted my hand into one of their orifices and pulled out that which was stuck there, and indeed a large portion of it was drawn out. Then I pushed in the other end that I could comprehend of the other passage, and then I opened its mouth and compressed its tongue. Then I left the orifice in that abscess."
"And indeed a large part of it was cut off from him, and only a little blood flowed from him." "Then the swelling of that woman subsided, and she immediately began to drink water, and indeed she took food. Therefore I did not cease to insert into that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it succeeded in healing the abscess in place of that which was prolonged."
"So I then took a cautery and burned the swelling of it, so that it might be completely removed. Then I wandered around and did not know what God had done with that one."
"Chapter XXXVII."
"On the Incision of a Swelling When It Is Abscessed."
"When catarrh descends to the swelling and it is abscessed and prolonged, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is located on the side of a fat person and is round, then it is called bubo."
"But when it is healed with that which we have said in the division, and does not confirm your cure, and indeed many times an abscess that has been cauterized is already completely healed and is thin, then it is necessary to insert into that which is aggregated roundly. And if it is at that length, and is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and does not have a center, then it is necessary to beware of the incision of it, for in that there is fear concerning illness."
"And when you see it according to the manner which I have described concerning its whiteness and length, that you make the illness cease and press the point of it with an instrument whose shape is processed thus and immediately place the onci in the new one and pull that downwards and incise it with one of those instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons."
"And it is necessary not to incise that except what is adapted over the natural term without addition, for if you incise more of it, you will cause its death."
"And immediately after the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and heal it so that it may be healed."
"But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then it is necessary to use a poultice in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery on it is not except with hot water, and it is that you press the head of the swelling on its surface, and immediately press the point of it with the instrument which we have mentioned, and immediately take some of that hot water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and pour it with that live cause, and pause it neither thick nor thin, and from there you fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
"Place the end of it in the cavity where the medicine is applied like the cavity of a spoon's handle. Place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not flow down through the inserted medicine into their throat, causing harm."
"Then press on the medicine with your mouth for about half an hour until you see that it has darkened and moistened from the warmth of your mouth."
"If you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray. Submerge the cotton in the medicine, then insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula until the cotton adheres to that cannula. Repeat this process as many times as needed until you achieve the desired cauterization of the wound, and leave it alone for three or four days until it dries up."
"And if you need to repeat the application of the medicine, do so. And after cauterization, clean the wound's perimeter with cotton soaked in boric acid, and rinse it with water that has been boiled. Then dress it with ointment and bandage it properly until it heals."
"And this type of treatment was saved from incision and prolonged fear."
"Sometimes the uvula is cured with such subtlety that it does not require cauterization or incision, as it can be treated by sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, camomile, brayd and similar herbs. Adjust all these ingredients, or some of them, in a mortar, and soak them with sour wine, then boil them. Let the mortar be well covered with decent lut, and in the middle of the mortar place a tube on which to set an enameled silver or brass instrument shaped like this:
The extremity has been inserted into the mouth of the patient while the vapour rises to the uvula causing it to become obscured.
Proceed to rub that moist cloth until it becomes dry, and make sure not to perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, as it would be too tight on the abscess. Instead, you should declare the abscess of the cautery.
But if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and attach a cloth to its end, so that the mouth of the patient may be covered. For the cloth will prevent vapour from burning the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter 38
Of the extraction of thorns and that which adheres in the throat, and other causes.
"Often adhesions form on the bladder or spine of the foot due to some other cause."
"Then you must remove what is visible of that [tumor], on which the sight falls, because when you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, it will be declared to you what is in the throat."
"And what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because it is very easy to remove the cause from the throat through vomiting. Or the patient can swallow a piece of bread or some lettuce or a sip of water; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the spot where its spines are stuck, they will be removed at that time." "And more you can take an eel and tie it tightly with thread, and let it inside the table and suddenly pull it out; or take a pot and suddenly put it in and suddenly take it out."
"And if those causes are not removed with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead in this way:"
"And it should be thicker than a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a hollow into which you will insert it easily into the patient's throat."
"And the patient should raise his head up, and be careful that the instrument does not touch the bones of the throat, lest it cause harm to the body or hurt the bone or spine, or the hand of the doctor."
"But nevertheless the patient should insert it himself, if he knows where the cause is attached and hurts him downwards, and then pull his hand up with the instrument, according to how much of it has been prepared inside until it is removed."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"Of removing a bloodsucker attached to the throat."
"When a bloodsucker has been treated with what we have said in the division of cure with medications and does not improve, then consider the throat of the patient under sunlight, because you should have prepared the tongue of it with that instrument which we have described."
"Then if you see the bloodsucker, remove it carefully with tweezers or gently with your fingers."
"And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and in the concavity of the cannula place a hot iron, and do this many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the throat) and make sure that the patient abstains from water all day."
"And then take a vein full of water that has been heated, and open the mouth of the patient into it, and wash his mouth with it; and do not let any cause remain in that water and hold it for an hour more with your hand, because the bloodsucker immediately feels the water cold."
"But if it is not removed with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafoetida through that instrument which we have described in the fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, until he falls asleep."
"And there is another way of operating in the fumigation of that, which is to take an earthenware vessel in which there are hot coals and cover it with a cloth, with a hole in the middle of it through which the extremity of the instrument should be placed; and then begin the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker will immediately fall asleep."
"And if it does not fall asleep, then repeat the fumigation many times, and make sure that the patient abstains from drinking and eating salty foods and salt, and does not drink water, because this regimen is necessary for him to follow."
"And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodsuckers are removed from the throat when they are seen; it resembles tweezers like these, except that it has some curvature:" "The one placed on the guolayro, its extremity being like the beak of a stork, that is a glove in which the sharpness of a file has been inserted."
"Chapter XL."
"This one is about the sum of the discourse on the opening of apostemes and their sectioning."
"Different kinds of apostemes, with many different characteristics according to their memory, each one discussed in this book."
"And they are diverse in their perforation and sectioning for two different methods: one of which is specific to embedded apostemes; and what we learn about humidity."
"And the second method is for those locations where accidents occur in the body, because the aposteme that occurs on the head differs from one that occurs on the buttocks; and likewise, an aposteme that occurs in a fleshy location differs from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment through operation."
"More about apostemes: some of which should not be perforated but await maturity or completion of their healing."
"There are other apostemes which should be removed when they become hardened, even if they have not reached maturity according to their completion: like those that are close to joints. For an aposteme near a joint, its evil extends into the surrounding area and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a main member, and if you delay perforation until it is ripe, the main member may suffer harm; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it before it becomes hard. And do not perforate one with incomplete digestion, but rather one close to the buttocks, lest its contents enter the rectum and cause elongation into the internal parts of the buttocks, forming a fistula or making healing difficult." "And so you should know the time for perforation of an aposteme, and this is when it has reached maturity."
"And know that an aposteme has reached maturity when there is a cessation of pain and fever, along with a decrease in heat and pulsation, and the tip of the aposteme becomes pointed, along with other signs."
"And know that perforation should be made in the location nearest to the aposteme and where pus has come out from its tip during curettage."
"And always perform perforation along the length of the flesh or body if apostemes are located on the face, buttocks, hands, feet, nerves, arteries; and finally in all locations except those which are reflected, for in these cases use reflection during perforation."
"But when an apostema is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave perforation until digestion has been fully completed, as we have said; for if you perforate it beforehand, the wound of it will extend and much foul matter will be emitted, and often its lips are hardened and its depth increased."
"But some apostemes should be perforated across the width of the flesh or body according to necessity, or according to what that member requires."
"And you should make a small perforation for smaller apostemes, but for larger ones make a large and wide perforation or many sections according to the diversity of their sizes."
"And there are other apostemes in which the chain should be curved and incised when it has become like bread dough and is in a condition where it can already be opened, as happens with those of the groin and buboes."
"And there are those which are incised with three-angle sections, and those in which it is incised like a mitre leaf, as with apostemes on the angles."
"And there are also those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are used, similar to those."
"But for that one where it is not like the others, such as superficial lion-like apostemes, you should perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only."
"And when the aposteme is large and has collected much pus, you should perforate it but do not attempt to remove all the pus at that time; having removed a part of it, then on the following day dress the aposteme again and subsequently remove a larger portion each time until it has healed."
"And even more so if the patient is a young child, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in decrepitude; for often at the time of pus discharge the animal spirit is resolved and quickly death occurs, and you operate at your peril."
"So heed this chapter with great care, and when performing perforation on these apostemes, be sure to cleanse the wound and consider whether the wound of the aposteme is small or has a flat section; if it is small, then apply a poultice or an ancient cataplasm. But if the apostema is large and its incisions are many, then you must pause between each pull until they come out together."
"And if a part of the chain has become separated or curved in its circuit within the aposteme, then you should close it with silk thread or linen thread, just as when you are tying bread dough or cheese, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day. Then proceed to treat it with what is appropriate for wounds until it is healed."
"But if blood flow occurs during your operation, then apply a linen cloth dipped in water and vinegar, pressing it against the location of the bleeding several times."
"But if the bleeding persists, then you should apply treatment and care and powders which have been recommended in many places throughout this book and elsewhere."
"But if it is wintertime and the location of the aposteme has many nerves, then you should apply powders made with hot wine and oil, pressing them onto those locations."
"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, all of which have been strained until the third day, as we have said. Then dress the aposteme and cleanse it and treat it with whatever is appropriate for its care until it has healed."
"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of apostemes in general; but according to the way of distinction, I have already spoken specifically about each aposteme and how it should be treated in separate chapters."
Chapter XLII.
"About the incision of apostemes that appear on the chain of the head."
"On the chain of the head there are small apostemes and they have nodes that contain tunics. There are many kinds of them."
"And among them are pimples, some of which contain moisture similar to lime." "And there are those that contain moisture like dust and those that resemble them, and those that are stony and hard."
"And in the sectioning of all these apostemes, there is nothing to fear about their extraction, for they do not cause any harm when extracted."
"The operation in sectioning these apostemes is that you should express them with an instrument shaped like this [illustration], called 'entromes', until you know what they contain."
"For if it contains moisture, then cut it open lengthwise with a superficial section following this shape:"
"And begin the section from line B to line G. Then, when the moisture has been evacuated, you should scrape away that part which contained the moisture and leave it without any cause whatsoever, for otherwise the aposteme may return if there is some cause remaining."
"And then immerse the wound in Egyptian tar if available, otherwise in water and salt; fill it with this and leave it overnight as it will corrode everything that is broken of that skin."
"And then apply Egyptian tar to that wound a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there are no broken parts of the skin left. Then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed."
"And if an abscess contains solid matter, then cut it open in this manner:" "And make an incision shaped like a cross, place clamps between the two lips of the wound and tear it apart completely, then squeeze out all your strength to remove the tunic that contains it."
"But if your attempt fails, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly, treat the hard abscess with cutting and healing according to what I have told you. And cutting into a hard abscess is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
"And sometimes these abscesses appear on the head in some men who have little moisture; this is because once you cut into an abscess on the head of an old woman and it turned out to be like a hard, rough, white stone that couldn't be crushed, and if someone were struck by it, they would be harmed."
"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not like this one, such as those that appear on the heads of children and around the ears, you should make a superficial incision."
"And pause the perforation of those that have been opened in order to relieve the body from the lower parts of the wound, for it is beneficial."
"And then treat those wounds with whatever is appropriate for their healing."
**Chapter XLII**
Of the Incision of Scrofulas that occur on the neck.
Many times these abscesses appear on the neck, armpits, and groin areas; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck are many and are often generated between them. And all scrofula of this type is within its own tunic, as in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have explained.
And the types of these scrofulas are many, for some are like stones, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you feel to be of good disposition by touch, whose color is similar to that of the skin and is swollen all around but not annexed to the nerves of the neck, veins or arteries, and is not hard, it is necessary for you to make a superficial incision from above to below on the body line between G and B, then scrape away the entire swelling and extend its lips with tweezers or several tweezers if necessary, as we have said in the case of head abscesses, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that you do not cut into a vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not harm your hand during the incision, or cause unnecessary injury; for if you cut into a vein or artery and interrupt your operation, at once apply vetriol plaster or other powders that stop bleeding, and then rinse the wound and allow it to rest until the swelling has subsided and the inflammation has eased. When the blood is absorbed.
Therefore return to your operation while it's still incomplete.
And appropriately examine the little finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings; therefore cut those and clean them.
And if it is in the vicinity of a large vein, then do not cut that scrophula from its root Take care to bind that tightly with folded linen and let it fall by itself without causing harm.
And appropriately fill the wound made from old linen that you have already immersed in Egyptian gum, and appropriately dress it
And if you cut out that entire scrophula, then it is necessary for you to join together the two lips of the wound and dress it right away so that there is no remaining excess
But if you see that there is some excess remaining due to the size of the scrophula, then it is necessary for you to extend and cut the root of that, and draw it out and administer suture and whatever else is said.
And concerning those scrophulas that contain fluidity, pierce it with a superficial perforation here where its maturity appears to you, and cease the perforation from that which is near the base of the body, as we have said
And appropriately administer perforation, cauterize it with Egyptian gum and similar things, so that it may consume whatever remains of the corruption. And properly when you see that the wound is already clean, then dress it with Egyptian gum from generative flesh so that it may be healed.
Chapter XLIII
On section of the pile of an accidental aposteme inside the gullet.
The ancients used this section in the epilhot, and there is hardly anyone in our land who has seen it done
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people
But in humans suffering from quinsy, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, because through this there would not be any benefit at all since all the veins and the major ones of the inflammation are here
But in those who have apostemes cauterized in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the canal, it is necessary to use section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction which occurs through perforation.
Therefore when we want this, it is necessary to incise the epiglottis from its three circles of the cartilage of the epiglottis, or four with a small section across its width in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is made in the cartilage and not in the cartilage itself. This place is convenient for the section because it is deprived of flesh and its vessels of blood are distant from it.
And if the physician is afraid, then it is necessary that he first extend the channel of the throat with an onion and properly cut the channel so that it may reach the canal, but avoid its vessels of blood if you see any cause for this.
And properly incise the cartilage according to what we have recommended. It is indicated about the section of the canal by the swelling which comes from there and that which comes from its disruption and by the suppression of the voice.
"Let the wound remain open for some time."
Then at the hour when removal is feared, attach two lips of skin from around the wound, and cut that alone which is cartilage.
Also apply medications that cause flesh to grow within it so that it may heal.
And Albucasis says that the main point of this discussion is that veins which some of these abscesses have already filled up with pus, and the patient has come into danger, and the breath of the patient has become obstructed, and some wish to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound for a little while, and be saved from death.
And therefore it is commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease is consumed; and this mischief lasts for three days. And then the wound should be closed up, and it will heal if properly cared for.
And this I have seen with my own eyes: that a servant took a knife and inserted it into his throat and incised part of the trachea, and I was called to attend to him. When I arrived, he was moaning like one who is dying, and when I opened up the wound, I found that blood had issued from it in little drops.
Therefore it was confessed that that wound had not touched vein or artery, and air came from the plague, and that one was cured within as it was healed.
And if it did not happen to the servant if she did not raise her voice, and after some days she returned to improve her conditions.
And now you say that in the section of the epitaph there is no fear.
Capital XLIV
Regarding the section on aposteme which occurs in the groin area, and is called an inguinal hernia.
This aposteme named hernia of the groin is a large aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is most common in women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the case of the natural one, it cannot be cured.
And the accidental one is of two kinds: the first resembles fat knots, and the other kind resembles an aposteme caused by the obstruction of an artery, in which there is fear. And it is not necessary to make a presumption about this with iron unless it is small. And then you should examine that with your finger and investigate it with the said instrument. And if you find it similar to fat knots, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should cut into it like nodes, and extract it with water containing it from the skin and bursa. And if not, then the whole of its nature should be scrutinized, and the place cured with what is necessary for cure until it is healed.
Capital XLV
Regarding the section on kinds of knots
Of the many kinds of knots, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And it is necessary for me to point out again the difference between a knot and an exitura (hernia) in case there is any doubt.
Therefore I say that in an hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of the excess moisture is stopped. And it is full putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat.
But in a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains only chyle or lymph which is proper to the sac itself.
And it appears according to the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a bruise, and it becomes like an empty sac, whether larger or smaller. And there are two kinds: some are fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, it is necessary for you to examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called intromes, according to what will come next in this chapter.
And this is the manner of inquiry for apostemes and all kinds of knots. You should take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place that you find in the aposteme, and you should move your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
And then you should lastly withdraw your hand according to the measure of the size of the aposteme, and then withdraw the intromes and consider what is issued in its track.
And if it is forgotten moisture that runs, of whatever color it may be, then you should cut it with a superficial section as I have said in other apostemes.
And if there is no moisture found from the track of the intromes, then you know that it is fat
And cut across it with a cross-section according to this form: Thus as you have taught, suspend that one with a noose, cut the chain from all parts easily, guard the skin or bag if possible over it and extract that corruption at its root.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times this happens there, so you should pull it out piece by piece until there remains no cause.
For if there remains any cause, little or much, the knot will return according to its nature.
And if there remains some small part of it, then fill the wound with some corrosive powder and press it down, placing a plaster that draws out the inflammation on top, and cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what encloses it.
But if there is a pulsating vessel on the contrary, or non-pulsating one, then cut and cauterize the place where it passes that is wet with vitriol, leaving it alone for two days or three until the wound purges itself and its inflammation calms down; and again return to cutting what remains of the knot.
Capitol xlvi
On the forms of instruments necessary for sectioning and perforation.
Those are the forms of intestines, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small.
This is the form of a large intestine
The form of a small intestine is this
There are three types of forceps: straight, curved, and angularly shaped ones. These should be used to quickly remove the intestines from the wounds.
And these are the forms of experience, which are called "albereds", and one of them is called "berid".
And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
The form of a large experience (experient) is like this:
The form of a medium-sized experience is like this:
The form of a small experience is like this
It is used for those wounds, exits, fistulas and swellings that occur due to bone fractures and other causes.
There are also thick needles, large needles, lions' teeth-shaped ones, and those like large sewing needles with which the threads are sewn. They can be made of citrus wood, bone or metal (iron or silver). The best ones are those made of citrus wood.
There are also the forceps called "forceps of black feathers," which are used to open those fistulas with a concave shape where reflections occur. These reflections should be avoided by lifting the feathers gently without touching them.
And they come in three types: some are long, others medium-sized, and still others short, depending on the width of the fistula and the degree of its stenosis.
Form of a large lead forceps:
"Form of leaden experient:"
"Form of small leaden experient:"
"The shapes of hooks are of many species, for some are simple, which is only a curvature, and there are three species: large, few, and medium."
"And they have curved horns, and there are three species."
"And among them there are some with two curvatures, and there are three species."
"And among them there are some with three curvatures, and there are three species."
"And all these are necessary in their place."
"Form of small simple hook, form of shadow:"
"Form of large hook with two curvatures:" "Form of medium hook with two curves:" "Form of small hook with two curvatures:"
"Form of large hook with three curvatures:"
"Form of medium hook with three curvatures:"
"And these are the shapes of scalpels with which the knots and boils are cut and scraped, and there are three species: some are large, medium, and small."
"Form of large scalpel:"
"Form of medium scalpel:"
"Form of small scalpel:"
"The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not paused in this manner, but so that cutting may be done judiciously in the scraping of knots without fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and thus the illness may be healed and tranquility obtained through a little cauterization which is useful after the scraping of the boil."
"And these are the forms of spatulas, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see."
"They are made of iron and are similar to a rod with which alcohol is made."
"And it has a pierced extremity covered with a spatula and on that side there are openings inside and outside, whenever you wish, as you see."
"The forms of spatulae, which are used between the said ones after the perforation of boils and do not cause harm, and there are three species: large, medium, and small." "And these are the forms of those:"
"The forms of syringes with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of lu:"
"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and they are subtle."
"And it is necessary that these species of syringes be large, medium, and small for you, so that with those the flow of blood may be absorbed quickly in case of necessity, and later when there is not medicine at hand."
"Expect that you do not use those to absorb blood from any part of the body and you should only use them in fleshy locations, such as the joints of the thighs and legs, and the joints of the arms, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks, etc., similar to fleshy moist joints."
"And sometimes these instruments are made in other small forms similar to tweezers according to this shape: for which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy, or in case of cutting a vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:"
"Chapter xlvii"
"Of the care of men's breasts, which resemble those of women."
"Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they begin to grow hairy and then their breasts become swollen and resemble those of women, with pimples."
"And if anyone has this condition, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then remove all the thickness, and then fill the wound with an encarnative plaster, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it heals."
"But if the breast hangs down towards one side and becomes softened by its size, like that of women, then it should be divided into two parts with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line of B. to the line of G. And then remove the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, drain it and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in the treatment until it heals."
"And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary because of the agitation of the illness and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and let that which has been corroded by it remain until it breaks off from the skin, and then cure it until it heals."
"Chapter xlviii"
"Of perforation of boils that come from the left nipple."
"Those boils that come from the left nipple are of the species called scrofula, hard ones which contain a core that can be squeezed out."
"And among those there are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form: from the line of G. to the line of B. And when all that is inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with wool and leave it alone until the next day."
"And then remove the cotton and cure it with an appropriate ointment for that purpose until it is healed."
"And if the boil is of the species called node or scrofula, then incise it according to what has been said in the section on engualment."
"But if the wound extends so that there is putrefaction, then administer a cautery according to what has been said about it earlier."
"Chapter xlix"
"Regarding the treatment of boils that occur due to an injury or inflammation."
"When an artery is broken and the blood vessel above it becomes clotted, often an abscess forms. The signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be due to injury or inflammation of an artery are that when an abscess is caused by an artery, it extends along the front of the chest; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rushing sound in it."
"And one that occurs due to inflammation of a vein is rounder in appearance."
"And the treatment of such an abscess is erroneous, especially when it occurs on the left side of the chest, in the armpits, and around the neck or other remote parts of the body. A large one should be avoided for cautery treatment with fire, but those that occur on the extremities or on the head can be treated this way."
"Regarding one that occurs due to inflammation of the mouth of an artery, it should be incised along its length. Then carefully spread the incision with forceps and expose the artery, and deliver it from the surrounding sheaths."
"And here is how you should proceed with that needle and make it penetrate on the other side, and bind the artery with double ligature in two places. This causes the disappearance of pulsation in both temporal arteries."
"And then punch the place that is between two ligatures with a spatha until all the blood in it is expressed, so that the abscess may be resolved."
"And then apply treatment to generate pus within the ligatures so that they fall away. And treat him with appropriate remedies until he is healed."
"And if it is an abscess due to the incision of a vein, you should then grasp as much of the abscess with your hand as possible near the vein. Then insert the needle from the side that you have held in your hand and make it penetrate; and twist it with double thread so that you may extract it from the other side. And then ligate the abscess with good linen according to what I have told you about the linen of two parts with two extremities of the thread."
"But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the forceps with that needle from both sides of the entire abscess near the initial incision of the needle, and bind your forceps in four places."
"And then dry the abscess in its middle part until it has dried out what is inside. Then incise the excess skin and leave that which is adherent to it."
"And then powder the place with the powder you have submerged in wine and oil, and apply treatment with hot compresses until it is healed."
"Chapter on abscess that occurs due to torsion of nerves."
"Just as an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, so also an abscess occurs in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive effort. And it happens similarly."
"And most often it occurs in the places of the forearms or ankles, or in any place where joints are moved excessively."
"And the abscess is severe, and it resembles the color of other flesh. And it has large amounts of pus within them without its outlet, and when they are pressed with great force, a kind of stupor-like pain is felt."
"And it is not aggregated in the front part of the body, and for that reason it is behind the vein. And it moves towards all parts but does not move forward or backward."
"Therefore, those that are in joints should not be cauterized with iron because it would greatly cause contraction."
"But that which is on the head or forehead near the vein must be cauterized with a hot iron." "But if it is a small abscess, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off at its root."
"And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps and scrape it out, and remove it. Then close the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals."
"Chapter LII."
"Chapter on incising an abscess that occurs from a boil that occurs on the belly."
"Certain people often see in the bellies of some and in other parts of their bodies those which are called funigules because they resemble those with fungi. Their root is subtle but its head is thick; sometimes its lips are open and it is small, or else it is greatly magnified."
"And I have seen one such, and in its belly there were two parts resembling fungi. There was no difference between them; they were white with thin roots."
"And the lips of those were turned back and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time."
"So I incised them and removed the first one weighing eighteen ounces, and the second one weighing six ounces."
"And the operation in incising them is that you should consider whether the pain is humid, and if the color of it is white, humid, with thin roots. Then incise it with a wide hot iron spatula, and have cauterizing irons ready in the fire because much blood is often expelled during the incision. And if blood comes out, cauterize it."
"And if the pain is slight and fearful, guard against incising with iron. But then take fresh lead wire that has been made, and bind it around that boil according to the manner we have described, and leave it for two days."
"And then adjust it in the constriction of the lead wire. And do not cease binding the lead around that boil until it has been cut off and fallen away on its own without manual effort."
"But if that boil is thick-rooted, then there is some cause for fear and anxiety during its incision, especially those in the belly."
"But it is possible to incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return."
"And then treat it until the wound has healed."
"And guard yourself from presuming to incise a boil that is of dark color, with little sensation, and carefully observed because it is cancerous."
"And I recall here about a crab."
"Chapter LII."
"Chapter on the treatment of prominence of the navel."
"Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons: either from fissures in the skin above the belly, or from tissue or bowel protruding through other ruptures; or from blood flowing from a vein or artery, as has been said before, or from constricted wind in it."
"But if it is from a fissure in the skin and from the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the boil is similar to the color of the body. And there is no pain, but it appears in various positions." "And if it is from protrusion of the bowel, then its position with respect to that which we have described varies greatly. And when you press it with your fingers it disappears and returns immediately afterwards. And there is great pain with it, especially during urination and great effort."
"But if it is from humidity, then there is no pain. And it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted nor enlarged."
"And if it is from blood, then the boil appears dark-colored and declining."
"But if it is from raw flesh, then the boil is serious, large, hard, and deep according to its quantity."
"But if it is from wind, then touching it causes no pain."
"If the belly's prominence is due to blood congestion, vein condition, or wind, then you should refrain from operating on them, for in that case there is fear and trepidation as taught in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses by arteries and veins."
"If the belly's prominence is due to bowel or tissue, then you should order the patient to hold their breath and stand extended. Then, carefully feel around the entire umbilical area with your tenting probe, and once found, command them to lie on their back between your thighs, and then circumcise with a broad spatula around the area where you've felt with the probe. Then, extend the abscess upwards with a large hook and tie it off strongly with thread or gut in proper fashion."
"And then cut the middle of the extended abscess toward the mesentery and insert your probe into that spot to seek the bowel. If you find it and preserve it with the mesentery, then extract it gently and push the bowel back inside the abdomen."
"If you have found tissue, then grasp it with forceps and excise its excess."
"But if it is an artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Then take two strong threads and pass them through needles, insert the needles into the tissue around the abscess in such a way as to cross each other like scissors, and penetrate them deeply. Then tie off the abscess at four points on the threads."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the tissue to retract and fall back into place on its own. Or, excise that area once it has become softened and necrotic, and then cure it with whatever ointment is appropriate until it heals."
"If the prominence of the navel is due to fat or moisture, then you should uncover the abscess as we have said and extract any blood or moisture that you find there. Then cure it with whatever ointment is appropriate until it becomes firm."
Chapter 53
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken in the section on cancer of its types and how it can be cured with medicine, and that cure with iron is avoided because it causes ulcers. We have also said that cancer arises from the greatest carelessness in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can be eradicated in certain locations, such as those on the breasts or scrotum, and it is especially so when it is caught early while still small.
But when cancer becomes advanced and severe, it is not proper to approach it, because I have never seen any case of such a growth that could be cured by me or anyone else.
And when surgery is necessary for cancer, as we have said, it should be preceded by allowing the disease to run its course and purging with black bile occasionally. Then make an incision if there is a clear sign of fullness or swelling.
Then prepare the patient for surgery by preparing the area where the operation will take place, and then make an incision with a knife that is suitable for the situation. Then excise all affected parts with careful dissection to ensure that no cause of the disease remains. Then allow the blood to flow freely, and do not remove the tissue too lightly. Express the surrounding tissues and wipe away all thick blood with your hand or an appropriate instrument.
But if you have difficulty with thick blood from veins or arteries, then cauterize that area until the bleeding stops. Then dress the wound with appropriate medication until it heals.
Chapter 54.
"On treating dropsy."
"We have already discussed, in the division of this book, the kinds of dropsy and their signs, as well as how to treat them with medications."
"And that which is cured by an iron (instrument) is only the species of ascites alone, and it is not approached with an iron for the species of tympanitis or the species of hydrops testalis, because that is fatal."
"And when you have medicated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medications and it does not confirm the effect of your medication, then consider whether the patient has already achieved debility, or if there is another kind of dropsy, like that in the lungs or abdomen, etc., then guard yourself from treating them with an iron instrument, for there is danger involved."
"But if you find the patient to be strong and healthy, and there is no other illness but dropsy alone, without childbirth or age, then the method of operation is as follows: You raise the patient between your thighs, and the assistant presses the abdomen with his hands, expelling the water from below the navel, and then takes a spinal needle in this way:"
"It should be made of two pointed parts, with one sharp end like a spine, but it should have some shortness gradually along its length, so that during the operation you do not penetrate too deeply into the bladder and harm it."
"And then consider whether the dropsy has come from the bladder, because if it has, you should make your incision along the navel for about three fingerbreadths on the left side, over the pubis."
"But if the dropsy has come from a liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingerbreadths."
"And if the cause of the dropsy is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side."
"And ensure that your incision is made above the side towards which you wish to direct the flow of fluid, so that the superfluities do not run to that particular location."
"And then pierce with the instrument through the whole length of the incision, insert it into that section, elevate your hand with the spatula between the cord and the siphon, and extract it; if there is a quantity equal to a fingernail or less."
"And then pierce through the siphon until the spatula reaches its desired location, which is where the water is." "And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:" "And it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or bronze or lion's hair, and at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and its tip is cut obliquely like a feather, thus:"
"And above its tip is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately the armilla falls over the instrument, so that it discharges the water in the middle ear in just the right quantity; for if you discharge more than necessary at that time, it can cause the death of the patient through dissolution of their vital spirit, or bring on a convulsive fit approaching death."
"But discharge it according to the quantity of fluid and according to what you understand from the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse and the soundness of their nature."
"And then extract the instrument and retain the water which causes this because it is immediately retained by the cord, which retains the hole that you should pierce according to this manner."
"And then iterate the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water; do this for several days successively with caution, taking care that not too much water remains."
"But if you are afraid for the patient and have removed too much water, then treat them with a poultice of hot sand, bathe them with salt water, and expose them to sunlight for a long time; also treat them with drying medications until they are healed."
"And cauterize over the stomach, spleen and liver immediately after the extraction of water, as I have described in what has preceded."
"Chapter 50."
"Of the treatment of children born with imperforate urinary openings."
"Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their mixture not pierced (either the hole is too narrow or it is not in its proper place)."
Therefore, you should immediately cauterize it with a perforation as soon as it appears with a very fine needle in this manner:
Then, immediately take a fine leaden needle and cauterize it, and do this for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, he should be moved away and allowed to urinate; then return him to his place.
But if you do not cauterize with lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the spot may not close this (wound).
However, that of which the cauterization is straight should be treated with a leaden needle, as we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
However, those in which the cauterization is not done in its place, such are called hermaphrodites, whose cause is that those who are born with it have the end of the penis cut off so that they cannot urinate from below until they lift up the penis with their hand above; and this does not occur during generation because the sperm cannot arrive at the opening correctly, which causes a very serious disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient should lie on his back, and then seize the head of the penis with your left hand with great force, and incise the glans of the penis in the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as if cutting a feather, taking care not to cut any part, so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis and the cauterization falls into its proper place.
And be careful during your operation on a hemorrhage, for it often happens that this occurs; and pause until the bleeding stops, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capítulo LV
De albugo, which occurs in the foreskin of the glans penis, and about whiteness, blackness, adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis.
This whiteness often occurs on the penis, which is a fleshy eminence.
And of that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
"No harmful, take a subtle hook and cut away that which you find there, cleanse it entirely; then press upon it gently with Egyptian gum; and afterwards, treat it with disinfectant until it is healed."
"And if it proves malignant, of dark hue, then you must apply cauterization near the incision and its cause."
"But if it is present in the foreskin of the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must remove the inflammation that is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; and then treat that which is outside, for when you treat them both together, it is not certain that it will not be damaged."
"And if such decay occurs in the genitals and in the blackened foreskin and corruption, then you must excise all that is already darkened and that threatens to decay or has already begun to decay; and afterwards apply a liniment made with honey, which is prepared with flour of barley meal and three parts of crushed and sifted frankincense."
"And apply this treatment together with another cure until it is healed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then you must apply cauterization to the moon according to this form:"
"For cautery is of two kinds together: it is for the flow of blood and for the ulcer when it has begun to decay."
"And if the head of the penis is eaten away and totally destroyed at that hour, then you must insert into the flesh of the foreskin a lead cannula through which the diseased urine may pass."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in that which has been circumcised, and over it circumcision is not required; but when adhesion occurs through ulceration or by aposteme) then you must remove with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to separate them precisely, then you must remove with a spatula some skin from the head of the penis and foreskin, for this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced by its very thinness lightly."
"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thread of silk, which has been moistened in warm water so that they may not adhere again."
"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter 57."
"Of the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to them at circumcision."
Circumcision is not the sole solution for continence as with other plagues. However, when it is our operation and within our will, and this deed is properly performed on children, we should assign to that the best operation and gentle path leading to health.
The ancients did not mention circumcision in all of their books, for they did not use it in their laws. This was because at that time, people had acquired the habit through experience, which is why most craftsmen and barbers practice circumcision using a razor or an awl. They also use liniment with pitch and incise with a fingernail.
"I have already tried all these methods and found no better modification with forceps, linen, or file in circumcision; for many times the skin has slipped away upwards because the foreskin has two tunics, leaving the outer one behind, which often results in another incision and certain pain." "Circumcision performed by apothecaries is digital, used by barbers, but does not secure the incision of the tip of the penis, for often it enters the urethra."
"Often in the operation with a nail, iron enters and ruins your operation." "And the skin of children is naturally short, often there are those who grow in such a way that they do not need circumcision; I have seen this."
"But with the modification that is done with forceps and linen with file, it has been proven for me to be good, because the forceps have a proportional incision, since the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; therefore when you press your hand proportionally with two sharpnesses and cut according to a comparison in one time, compression of the file is made containing the skin of the foreskin completely divided without any error."
"And the first manner of operation is that you should have the child hold still if possible, so that you do not simply place the file on his penis alone, and leave him for another day."
"And moreover, make sure to explain in all that manner that is possible to him so that he understands his intelligence." "And moreover, make sure that he is between your hands and well prepared, not the least bit frightened; hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
"And moreover, put your hand on his penis and blow on the skin, then pull it out until the head of the penis is exposed, and immediately circumcise that which has accumulated dirt."
"The form of forceps used for circumcision is as follows:"
"Their form is such that the outer ones are not sharpened and the inner ones are sharpened so that the root of the claw does not come out, and the length of both points should be equal to the length of two bent handles."
"But the mistake in circumcision is when you remove too much skin from within or cut off too much on one side of the incision."
"Therefore, you should stretch that out during your time with your nail before the swelling of the spot and cut it according to equality."
"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with tweezers and cut it."
"But if three days have passed and there remains still some swelling around the penis, then you should wait until the inflammation has subsided somewhat and gently cut away that which has grown over it according to what you have prepared."
"And be careful of the head of the penis, for it will not endure much."
"And therefore care for him with that which consolidates the plague according to the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
"And if it has been cut from the skin appropriately and you follow the instructions given above, then nothing will happen to him."
"And moreover, care for him with that which we have said until he is healed."
"Chapter LVIII."
"On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder."
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by blood clotted together, or by poverty or hardness of flesh, and similar to those mentioned earlier regarding methods of treatment in division.
And if it is not dissolved with what has been said above, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it using the instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and carefully crafted like a feather quill pen, about as long as half a palm's width in its fineness, at whose tip there is a thin tube.
And the manner of extracting urine through that is: Take the doubled felt and tie it securely at the end of the wick or thread; then insert the extremities of the felt into the opening of the syringe, and if there are any excess threads on the felt, cut them off with scissors. Then insert the felt into the tube with force, and appropriate pressure should be applied to the syringe with a border and a plug made of wool.
"Place the patient on the shield, grasp their thigh and vein, and grease them with warm oil, olive oil, and hot water."
"If it is difficult to reach the root of the vein; if it is doubled above the navel; and if it enters into that, then enter into that until it reaches the bladder, and if not done in this order, then it is wrong."
"And also stretch the thread with fine wool little by little, for urine dries wool."
"Also remove that and perform a cure with urine, using a catheter. Do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient obtains relief."
Chapter 9
Of the qualities of irrigation of the bladder with candlewicks and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or congealed blood is present there, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you wish to drip waters and medicines into that, then use an instrument called candlewick, and this is its form:
but at the outer end of it is closed, so that it may not leak. And in that there are three openings: two on one side, thus as shown [in the diagram].
At the beginning there is a hollow space, into which water is poured; and according to the quantity of water that fills it, without addition, until when some cause draws from it any humidity, it draws it out, and when it expels, with this it expels also, like a candlewick with which naphtha is ignited in naval battles.
Therefore, when you wish to inject water into the bladder, insert the extremity of the candlewick into the urethra, and draw with it the water that is expelled through the openings above, for the water is drawn into the concavity of the candlewick.
And also insert the extremity of the candlewick into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the case of catheterization; and also expel the water with whatever you are expelling it with, for that water reaches the bladder quickly, and the ailment is thus relieved.
The form of the thin catheter with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its form:
"It should be made of silver or lead, with its tip resembling a small feather; let it be inserted carefully."
"And then take a bladder, and place within it the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and tie that bladder firmly with two strong strings tied together in a double knot, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"And then insert the tip of the crystal into the vessel's neck."
"And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the stretched-out moisture inside until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder."
"But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that circle throughout its entirety; and then insert thread strongly into those holes, so that it may be rotated; and then attach the circle as it is attached to other such circles, because you will place in that one what you wish of humidities, oils, and waters."
"And then tie that onto the instrument and proceed with it as you did with the bladder, expressing with your hand until you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder."
"Chapter LX."
"Of the Extraction of a Kidney Stone."
"We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of that."
"And we have said about the stone for which operation by hand or section is necessary."
"And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that one which remains in the bladder."
"And we shall now recount it with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
"Therefore it is said that stones generated in the bladder are found mostly among children. And their signs are that urine which is emitted from the bladder appears like water in its fineness and clarity, and there is pain during urination and sometimes bloody discharge; also, the illness usually worsens at night."
"And it would be easier to treat children with this condition if they have attained fourteen years of age; but treatment is difficult in the elderly." "But among young people, it is more common than in others."
"And if the stone is large, treatment will be easier; but if it is small, it is contrary to that."
"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition, at the beginning of it we should cleanse the illness with a catheter which extracts all the pus that is in its passages; for sometimes that passage prevents the exit of the stone during the examination."
"And then let the illness be taken with its weights and be lifted up and moved about until the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or moves from its place."
"And then have ready between your hands the most prepared catheter and its weights, and put aside all other things, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards the parts below."
"And then seek it out and follow it entirely downwards."
"So if you feel the stone in that space, immediately cut upon it with a section."
"And if you cannot feel it with your touch at all below, then you should anoint the tip of your left index finger with oil, if the illness is a child, or the middle finger if it is a full-grown person, and insert that into its anus." "And seek out for the stone until you find it below your finger." "Then slowly turn it little by little towards the neck of the bladder."
"And then press upon it with your finger and expel it outwards from its place where you made the section."
"And command the minister to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand he shall extend the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand he shall raise up the cord which is below the scrotum, at the place where the section is made."
"And then insert spatula B, which has this form:" "And then cut with it into that which is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle place, inclining towards the left side; and let the section be made upon that stone, and your finger should be inside the anus at the time of the section, and let the section be transverse, so that the opening outside may be wide and inside narrow according to what is possible for the stone to come out through it, nor more, for otherwise you will compress your finger which is inside the anus with the stone during the section, and thus cause difficulty without need."
"And know that among stones there are some which have angles and edges, for the extraction of which is difficult because of this."
"And among those which are round like an egg, and spherical in shape, extraction is easy."
"So if it is one of those stones with angles and edges, adjust your forceps in the fissure."
"And if it is not thus extracted, then you should push upon it or press upon it gently with the end of this instrument which resembles a file with which you press upon the stone and do not slip off from it; or else insert this thin curved instrument below it."
"But if you cannot get on top of it, then widen the passage a little; and if you see flow of blood, cut upon it strongly with nitre dissolved in vinegar."
"But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder and cut upon it; and then press a little upon that place again; and similarly do this if there are more than two."
"And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to cut upon it with a large section, for one of two causes happens to the illness: either it remains or else it engenders again from the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated."
"But prepare for expulsion of that which has been extracted, or push it out from the fracture with forceps in pieces."
"So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with threads of aloe and dragon's blood, and sew it up." "And place upon that a linen cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that a dry crust may be formed."
"And then have the patient lie on his back, and do not remove the ligature until the third day."
"And when that has been removed, wash the place with warm water and much oil, and then treat it with ointment of cinnamon and ointment of diacynthion until it is healed."
"But if in the wound there occurs a dry and corrosive aposteme, like that which resembles frozen blood in the bladder, and by this means urine is forbidden (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it causes irritation of the bladder and putrefaction."
"And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate for all kinds of wounds according to what is suitable for its healing."
"And it is necessary during all the time of the treatment that you keep both sides covered and adjust the medications which are placed upon the place."
"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and is stuck there, and it is forbidden to pass urine, then treat it with what I have recommended before that you arrive at section, for many cases seen through this treatment are attributed to section; and now I will explain this, and it is that you take a steel sound, of which this is the form:"
"Of triangular shape, sharp, inserted into wood."
"And then take the stone and remove it from the bladder to prevent it from returning."
"Then insert the iron into the urethra, carefully piercing until the probe reaches that stone." "And slowly turn the probe with your hand around that stone, pushing it through until you feel it penetrate to the other side; for urine is then released."
"Then press your hand on what is left of the stone from its exit point outside the urethra, because that is fragmented and flushed away with urine, and the patient is healed."
"However, if this procedure is not suitable for any reason that prevents it, then remove the stone and place another stone above it." "And then cut the stone in that urethra between two ligatures." "And next, remove that." "And also untie the ligament and cleanse the blood congealed therein, which is formed in the wound."
It is not necessary to leave bile in the kidney except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above because when the bile is released near the exit of the kidney, the cord returns to its place and regains its strength.
Therefore it is necessary when you have released the bile above that you raise the cord to the parts above, or else it will return and complete its task, regaining its strength as we have said.
Chapter 61
Of the Extraction of Kidney Stones in Women
In women, stones in the kidney are rarely formed.
But if they appear in any of those, their cure is difficult and forbidden by many ways.
One of them is that women are reluctant to undergo surgery.
And the second is because you cannot find a woman who willingly exposes herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or is among those who are married.
The third is that there may not be any skilled women who know this art, especially the operation using the hand.
"And the fourth is that in women the sectioning location on stone is distant from the stone itself, thus requiring a thorough section and there is fear."
"And if necessity obliges you to this, then it would be necessary for you to take a woman who is well-known and not easily frightened."
"And if you are deprived of that [woman], then look for one who is experienced and skilled, or present a woman midwife well-known in the practice of women's matters, or a woman who has been instructed in this art."
"So have that woman present, and command her to do everything that you will order her from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; this is so that she may observe if the woman is a virgin, otherwise she must put her hand into the woman's vulva and feel for the stone."
"So if you find it [the stone], grasp that with your hand and then command her to insert her finger upon it."
If the patient is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine around the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, feeling carefully with good skill.
Then, if she finds the stone, she must carefully remove it from its position in the bladder through the opening of the vagina using her skill and strength until it reaches the entrance.
And furthermore, she should insert her finger into the appropriate position of the entrance to the vagina where the stone has stopped and carefully place the stone in that location without removing her finger from it.
And the section should be small at first. Then insert the knife into that section and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to how much of the stone will need to be removed from there.
And know that stones are various in shape: some are small and round, others are large and sharp, still others are long and round, and some have branches.
So you should know what kinds of stones there are based on what I've said about the topic at hand.
And if you see blood flowing, adjust the position of the vessel and hold it for an hour until the bleeding is stopped. Then return to your operation until the stone has been removed completely.
And see that you have prepared the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you see blood flowing and know that the bleeding is coming from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to that location and press it firmly with a bandage of linen and strict compression. Do not repeat this process; leave the stone alone and do not try to remove it, for otherwise the patient will surely die. And then dress the wound
So after the bleeding has ceased and the location has healed somewhat after several days, then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
Chapter 62
On Incision for a Strangulated Hernia
A strangulated hernia is nothing more than an accumulation of fluid in the white sac, which is left behind by the genitals containing the intestines, and it is called a hernia.
And sometimes it is found in the proper skin, which nature prepares for it at the time of birth, where the intestines have grown through to become another set. And this is the cord of the genitals between the white sac that we have spoken of, and it is nothing more than fat.
"Hernias are caused by weakness in the groin area. This happens when excessive matter accumulates there and sometimes occurs due to injuries sustained."
"This moisture has many colors: sometimes it tends towards yellow or red, or purple, or black and earthy, or watery white; this is the most common."
"If it is in the white cyphac that we have mentioned, then the swelling tends to elongate somewhat in a longitudinal fashion, resembling an egg shape. The groin becomes visible because the moisture covers almost its entire surface."
"If the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the swelling resembles two eggs and it is believed to be a case of twins."
"If the moisture is between the groin and the white cyphac, then the swelling will occur on both sides."
"If you wish to determine the color of the moisture in a swelling, then observe the color of the moisture in the center of the swelling. Based on what is seen at the entrance of the opening, one can judge what is inside."
"Therefore, when it comes to the treatment of this condition with iron, if possible, we should command the patient to cough if they are able. This will help evacuate the contents of the swelling."
"And let him be propped up on his shoulders somewhat above, and cover him with moist cloths."
"And you should sit on the left side of him, and command your assistant to stand on the right side. Let them extend their urine tube about two spans along the groin down towards the navel."
"And then take a broad, sharp knife and cut through the middle of the groin towards the penis."
"And let this incision be made according to the rule of equal distances from the line that should divide the skin of the groin until it reaches the white cyphac."
"And then excise it, and observe carefully to ensure that you do not cut too deeply. Excise it so that the skin is suspended by only one thread, and carefully examine it according to its quantity as much as possible."
"And then make a large hole in the full cyphac of water, and remove all the water."
"And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the cyphac at its sides. Do not touch the groin including the cyphac, and cut into it in whatever way is possible for you." "And cut into it entirely or in pieces, especially on its sides more finely. For if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return."
"But if the cyphac extends outside of its groin during your operation, then after you have completed the incision of the cyphac, return it inside. Then join the two lips of the groin with sutures and treat him as you would other people, until he is healed."
"And if you find the cyphac corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are near the suspenders and remove the cyphac. Then treat him with what has been said."
"But if water collects in two places at the same time, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore cut into that part as you did the other one equally; and if it seems to be an operation, then perform it."
"And then wipe away the blood, and enter into the incisions cotton soaked in oil or rose oil. Then place another piece of cotton soaked in wine and oil over both groins and the navel. Then cover it with folded cloths and powders, and bind them together according to this form:"
"And then take two cloths and fill them with cotton wool according to this likeness. Then make the ends of them with which they are pressed together of wax or wet cotton wool, and attach them with a string in the fly of the breeches, and one end should take from the buttocks inward, and the other end should take at the navel, and two bands on both sides and two bands above, and all restriction should be adjusted in the fly of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a caustic instead of an incision with iron; and it is that you take a sharp cautery knife and cut the groin with it. And ignite it according to what has been recommended until the white cyphac containing water is revealed. Then take a cautery in this form:" "And it resembles the Greek letter 'Gamma'."
"And then pierce that cyphac with it and burn until all moisture is expelled."
"And then extend the cyphac with forceps and excise it with forceps and cautery, carefully burned. And cut into it according to your ability until you eradicate it completely. And beware that the fire does not touch the cyphac."
"And know that this operation is safer and further from bleeding than an operation with incision."
"But if an abscess occurs during the incision or cautery operation, or bleeding occurs, then you should treat that condition according to what has been said."
"But if the illness is dangerous and does not wait for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform perforation according to what has been recommended. And this is when you are certain, by what has been said about the meanings, that that hernia is aqueous."
"Then you should make a seat for the illness on some raised cushion, and then perforate the abscess in its lowest part with a wide spatula, and perform the perforation according to the length of the body."
"And let the aperture be wide enough to release all water."
"And then place cotton on that spot and bind it. And leave it alone for the remainder of the water to escape." "And then treat him until the wound is healed."
"But if there is difficulty in the exit of water at that time, then perforate it: and this is done only when the white panus around the wound opening obstructs the exit of water. Then insert a pen or an instrument for removing water from hydrocele patients, whose shape is shown beforehand; or attach a small tube to the aperture of the wound."
"And know that water will return and collect again after about six months or less. And when it collects again, then perform perforation in the same manner as before, for this illness will thus have its days."
Chapter LXIII
Of Incision on Fatty Hernia and Its Treatment
Know that in this section about this hernia, there is fear of losing the patient to danger in the worst dispositions; therefore, it is my view that dismissal of him and saving him by that better means should be considered.
You are also remembering the operation on this one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that the abscesses are born in those bodies whose veins are inflamed and this happens for many causes: either by acute severe excess of matter that flows into the veins, or by blows.
And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the area of pain, this is a severe abscess.
A hard, lifted abscess has dark coloring, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens due to the narrowing of the arteries and by inflammation of those that have already been perceived as remembered from before, or by inflammation of veins.
But what happens due to inflammation of arteries is known by the spreading of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
But that which happens due to inflammation of a vein does not spread from it for any reason, even with compression by the fingers.
And it is possible that on this type of abscess there can be made an incision and on the other flesh; it is to insert the chain of veins, and appropriate stretch out the wound above its parts, and extract that white fluid from it, and release the suspenders of vessels, and tie them up, and incise those suspenders that you have released from all parts of the wound.
Therefore, if the abscess is already united with those flesh parts, then it is necessary to extract that abscess and incise it.
And if there is adhesion within some cause of the fluid or between that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary to release all that adhesion and make a round incision.
But if there is a formation of flesh in the place where the adhesion was which is behind it, then it is necessary to incise all that which is from it and extract the abscess just as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rosemary oil and wine; and appropriate care for it with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV
Concerning the treatment of a hernia that is of wind.
Wind hernia is an abscess surrounded by some sort of covering resembling a bud with softening of the testicles, and it causes difficulty in exercise and walking due to illness.
And for the treatment of this illness, fear is used as that from which memory precedes.
However, it is necessary to speak operation on it according to what was said first.
And I say that it is necessary to elevate the illness on a high pillow; and appropriate pull back the suspenders of the testicles from its sides; and appropriate take the chain of veins with your fingers where the vessels are visible at the pubic region; and appropriately have another assistant who will extend them with violent traction.
And appropriate incise with a sharp, broad scalpel for a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are visible.
And appropriate excoriate from all parts just as we have said in extraction of arterial ligatures which are on the temples.
And appropriate place in those a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first of the places where wind hernia occurred and tie it again at the last one. And appropriate incise those in the middle place for a straight section according to the length of the body and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And appropriate care for the wound with cure of other wounds where you want healthy tissue to be generated so that the vessels which you have tied do not fall out, because it is not good for that.
But if wind hernia occurs on all vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or tie them up with the vessels because of which they become deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and that they be sewn closed or tied up so that there is no benefit from them.
Chapter LXV
"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the diaphragm extended over the abdomen from both sides of the navel, causing the intestines to protrude through that rupture."
"And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or an opening in it, and such cases occur due to many causes: either by percussion, by a sneeze, by coughing, by lifting something heavy, or by a sudden effort."
"And the sign of that, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly; it is like an impostume that develops within the chest because the diaphragm compresses the intestine."
"And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it appears as an impostume different from that near the navel, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body lies on both sides of the diaphragm."
"And sometimes the tissue around the intestine is forgotten outside, and this type of hernia is called an entestial incarcerated or 'strangulated' hernia."
"And sometimes it occurs with windiness, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal crevice and gets stuck there, causing great harm to the condition; and sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when it is pressed upon."
"And in the treatment of cases of this disease with iron, care must be taken to avoid cauterization in that area."
"And the method of operating on this is that you should ask the patient to reduce the intestine with his own hand towards its normal position if it obeys its return; and then quickly press your hands upon its coil between the two arms, elevating its contents."
"And then stretch the scrotum which holds the cord of the testicles upwards, and cut through the cord of the testicles along its length; and then place two hooks on both sides of the incision to open the wound as you require."
"And if it is necessary to make an incision according to your judgement, do so in such a way that as much of that loop may be brought out as possible."
"And then strip away the sheaths of the intestine which lie near the cord of the testicles until the white shining wall of the intestine is exposed on each side."
"Then you should insert your finger into that which is the testicle, that is between the white intestine, which lies near the loop of the bowel, and behind it; and then separate it with that adhesion which is in the part behind the loop."
"And then carefully lift the cord of the testicles upwards with your hand, and at the same time extend the white intestine upwards with your left hand, elevating the loop of bowel with the intestine to the part where the incision is made; and then ask the assistant to extend the loop further upwards, and you should dissolve that adhesion which is behind it with a gentle solution."
"And then carefully examine all around that there may be no cause of the bowel being involved in the white tough tunic." "But if you find any cause, then quickly push it back into the abdomen."
"And then make an incision in that part near the cord of the testicles, through which blood and urine may flow freely, as we have advised earlier."
"And then apply lanum soaked in oil to the wound; and then apply the ligature which we have advised (and sometimes cauterize the white tissue near the incision of the blood vessel, as it often happens); and then leave the ligature so that it may fall by itself."
"But if the wound closes slowly, then cold water should be poured on it, and a dressing applied over it so that it may fall away as we have said."
"And then dress the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed."
"Chapter LXVI."
"On Windy Hernia."
"There is no one who has been burned by the treatment of this with iron."
"And the first thing they said was that it should be treated in the same way as the hernia with wine, which is to tie up the vessels near the cut on that side with feacility; and then dry up the middle part around the inflammation with whatever works that; so that the vessels may fall away."
"And dress the wound as we have said until it is healed."
"Chapter LXVII."
"On the Dislocation Which Occurs in Joints."
Some veins sometimes rupture in the ankles as we have said, and it appears enlarged.
And do not give any cause for the intestines to the patient; and if you do give one, it is little; and return in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, an adjusted fissure occurs in the scrotum through which the intestine enters the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, which is in the ankles as we have said, which causes the scrotum to become extended and softened, and the place becomes inflamed and enlarged.
And its treatment is with cauterization as described above.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between the two thighs, and then dry the place of the rupture of the swollen apostemas by sectioning along its width according to their quantity, three times.
And then strengthen the scrotum white that is below the tailbone so that it may be uncovered.
"Then take the wand and place it on the prominent part of the hip joint, pressing gently on the abdomen."
"And place both prominent locations over the extremity of the hip bone, adjusting one against the other at the suture line."
"And then extract the extremity of the wand, ensuring that you do not touch any part of the hip bone, nor extend it too much, or cause injury as you know how to perform this intestinal hernia cure."
"And then cure it with the treatment for hernias, and if you incise the veins, cleanse them and restore the hernia before it solidifies, because the hip joint contracts and is not adjusted to the prominence of rupture."
"It is better to cauterize at this location, as it is closer to safety."
Chapter LXVII
"Concerning the softening of the spermatic cord."
"Frequently in some men, the chain of the testicles becomes softened because the flesh between them is softened; it is said to be caused by neglect."
"Therefore it is necessary that whoever undertakes the treatment of this patient should make him lie down on his back, and cut all of the softened cord from its natural position; afterwards, he should join the two lips with a suture."
"And if you wish, at the beginning, it is possible to remove the excess of softened cord with three or four stitches and a firm suture."
"Then cut between the sutures; afterwards treat for other diseases until he is healed, and the wounds close."
"The sixty-ninth chapter"
"Of castration."
"Know that castration is condemned in our law, but it is permitted to me to remember this in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways: the first is because of the science of medicine when one inquires about it, so that he knows how to treat him to whom it happens; the second way is that often we have needed castration of other beasts for our pleasures, such as dogs, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting with a section."
"In cases caused by contusion, the procedure is to immerse the affected part in hot water until its joints are softened and it is limbered, then hang it." "And then take those with your hand, but only those that are resolved and do not appear to be left behind from the touch."
"In cases of castration done by incision and sectioning, hold the animal firmly and press on the cord of its testicles with your left hand."
"And then tie off the suspension ligament, and make an incision above each cut with a sectioning motion until both testicles have been removed."
"And then cut those that have already separated themselves from the body wall." "Do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but rather remove the thin skin which covers the vases."
"And this method of castration is better than that done by contusion because strong contusion leaves no trace of the testicles and causes the animal to desire copulation."
"And then dress the wound until it has healed."
"Chapter LXX."
"Concerning the treatment of hermaphrodism."
"Hermaphrodism in males occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears as a space in the cord of the testicles between which there are two testicles resembling an opening like that of a female, and through which sperm passes."
"And sometimes urine flows from that same cord of the testicles."
"But in females it is one species: that is, the opening of the female above the pelvis is like two testicles of a male, each of which emits a little urine at the time of emission like the penis of a male and two testicles."
"And its treatment is three species: two for males and one species for females." "And it is necessary that you make an incision in those flesh folds where the urine flows out, and then dress them with the same care as other wounds."
"And in the second species of males where urine comes out from the cord of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it."
"Chapter XXI."
"Concerning lens and prominent flesh caused by females."
"A prominent lens is naturally adjusted during erection and becomes erect due to attention, but sometimes it is enlarged in some females such that it spreads out like in males and enters the vagina during copulation."
"Therefore you should grasp the excess of the lens with your hand or with a hook and make an incision."
"And do not lastly in the incision, especially on the glans penis, lest blood flow."
"And then dress it with the care of wounds until it has healed."
"But flesh born is flesh that appears in the horrific of the mother within which it fills up, and fortunately it is extruded from the openings externally resembling the tail (and thus some first called this “disease of the tail”). Therefore we should incise it just as we do for lens, and dress it until it has healed."
"Chapter LXXII."
"Concerning treatment of arthritis."
"Arthritis is when the opening of the female is not perforated or has a small passage." "And it is either natural or accidental."
"Accidental occurs due to illness that has preceded it, and this is caused by flesh naturally adjusted, or by flesh newly born or thickened skin."
"And it occurs either in the front of the mother or on her sides, or above her pubic bone or below her pubic bone. It prevents coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and often it prevents menstruation as well."
"And the diagnosis of this is made by examining the opening of the vagina if the obstruction is apparent. But if it is not apparent, you should examine it with your fingers or a probe."
"But if the obstruction is due to thin skin, and it is apparent between the two lips, then you should cut it open."
"And if it stops over the two pubic lips, then carefully insert your fingers on both sides of where it is most thickened."
"And the female should be on her back with her thighs extended. Then carefully pull apart the two lips with force until that thin skin is broken and the obstruction is opened."
"And then take wool moistened in oil and place it on that location. Leave it there for a day so that the skin does not stick together again."
"But if the skin is thick and hard, then you should incise it with a broad spath or with a myrtle leaf."
"But if the obstruction is due to flesh being born, then suspend that flesh with a hook and incise it."
"And apply medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as achati, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with album of egg white."
"And then insert a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from closing too quickly."
"And keep it like that for several days and apply warm water compresses."
"And then dress it with the usual treatment for consolidation until it has healed."
"And sometimes during birth other flesh is born alongside. If this happens, incise according to the method described above." "But if this is due to an embryonic tumor, then do not cause any injury with iron in any way to that embryonic tumor within the uterus."
"Chapter LXXIII."
"Concerning the treatment of hemorrhoids, prolapse of the rectum, and red tumor that occurs in the opening of females."
"Hemorrhoids are a prominence of many veins around the openings from which blood flows continuously. And when these hemorrhoids become old, they are called piles."
"And I have already spoken in the division about the species and signs of these, and I will say now which ones receive treatment and which do not."
"So I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are in the front of the uterus and cannot be felt do not receive treatment with iron."
"But those which are at the opening of the uterus where you can feel them are those that are treated."
"And you should make the woman lie on her back and then extend her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth and incise those piles with a razor."
"And then sprinkle powder on them that stops bleeding without biting, such as achati or similar ones."
"And then make her lie on her belly for an hour and apply a warm water compress to the wound."
"And if bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the skins of pomegranates and figs and similar ones."
"And then take barley flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine. Make a poultice with this and apply it on the back of her buttocks."
"And if bleeding is profuse, that is good. But if not, make it adhere with two cupping glasses and apply scarification to the breasts."
"And then take wool and immerse it in juice of coriander or juice of agrimony or juice of garlic with white wine. Make it adhere to the location, and then dress the wound with egg whites until it is healed."
"And dress it until it is healed."
"Chapter LXXIV."
"Of accidental perforation of the bladder in the uterus."
Many species of ulcers occur in the greater part of the body, such as hard and fleshy tumors, and ulcerous growths and inflamed ones, and serpiginous and fistulous ones that are bloody and reddish. And you have already described these illnesses and their species and their symptoms, and their remedies in the division [of the book].
And it is necessary that you should speak in this treatise of cauterizing the ulcer which occurs on the body when it is of those ulcers which are hard to heal, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is performed with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the ulcer at its beginning is sharp with percussion and swelling and fever, and if sometimes it reddens and if cats are attracted to it, then do not cut into it with a perforation, but cure it with water which aids in its maturation until the acuteness of the accident ceases.
And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie on her back on two pillows; and let her recline on her shoulders with her heels placed near the edge of the bed outside her belly, and let her legs be extended, and let her arms be placed far from her sides, and bind each one with a cloth conveniently.
And then the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the belly is made, the form of which will come in those causes that will be mentioned here.
And it is necessary that when you wish to administer this instrument, you should place yourself in front of the woman's belly and ensure that only the point of the instrument enters the belly and leads towards the ulcer. But if the instrument is larger than the point of the belly, then it is necessary that you place poultices on the texture of the point of the belly so that the entrance of any instrument into the point of the belly is prohibited.
And it is necessary that you place the thread which runs through the instrument on the right side above, and that the one who ministers holds the instrument and turns the thread until the opening of the belly has been made.
And when the exit comes out and is touched with the hand and is loose and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that with a broad spatula.
And when the sanies has been evacuated, then it is necessary that you place in the wound a medicated wick soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringency; and let the compress remain on the section of the point of the belly.
And then cover the belly and place over it clean wool immersed in water in which mallows have been boiled.
"Then it should be treated for about two days until it heals."
"Sometimes the wound is washed with honey and then rinsed with water in which iris root or long pepper has been boiled, and then it is returned to the wound."
"If the wound has gone deep into the flesh, then you should forbear from treating it with iron and instead use water as we have described in this section."
"Chapter 75."
"To teach midwives how to treat women with abnormal uterine bleeding according to their figurative causes."
"It is necessary that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs. When you see the woman pressing on her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and she is relieved when something comes out from her above, and hastens the expulsion of the baby, then you will know that this birth is according to nature, and it exits onto her head, and the second one with its cord either suspended or pendant from the navel."
"Therefore, when you see those signs, then the belly should be pressed so that the baby may come out easily. When it comes out onto its head, the second one follows, and is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing."
"But if this is not that birth, it is abnormal and blameworthy, for when the baby comes out on its feet, its body comes out before its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot, or its head comes out with its hand, or at its belly, and its face is turned upwards towards its neck, such are the figures of abnormal births."
"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, so that she may guard against error and deception."
"And I will show you all the figures of those births, and what kind they are in them, so that it may be understood by this and judged accordingly."
"When the feet come out first due to an upright position and it is violent upon the woman, and she has a difficult delivery, and her strength is already weakened, then she should do this: women should have her sit up, and evacuate her with fennugreek decoction and olive oil."
"And then the midwife should insert her finger between the baby's thighs and tear it open with that, or separate it with her nail within what is in it of humidity." "And press on the woman's belly so that she may expel the baby."
"But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with pitch and fennugreek mucilage mixed with nard."
"And then command her to be pressed down again, and make her sneeze with incense; and put your mouth and nose over hers for one hour, for the baby will soon be forgotten."
"And if both arms of the baby are forgotten at the beginning, then you should reduce them gently little by little." "But if it does not obey the intermediation, then place the woman on a large stone and lift her legs up, and quickly push the stone down towards the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the shock."
"And if the arms are not returned and the baby dies, then cut them open and remove the membrane of the baby or tie its body to your hand with cloth and remove it evenly, for that will soon be forgotten."
"When the baby comes out feet-first, then you should push those up, turn the baby around gently, anoint it, grasp its foot, and slowly extend it."
"But when it is already inside the uterus, then you should command it to come out, and make it sneeze with incense, for it will soon be forgotten if God wills."
"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then slowly return the baby into place according to its natural figure, for it will now be forgotten with an easy delivery."
"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take some aloe mucilage and gum dissolved, grind them well in the mortar, and anoint the woman's belly, especially its lower part." "And then make her drink warm water to promote contractions."
"And when sometimes the parts of her are inflamed, then perform fumigation of myrtle on her and apply cold compresses." "And when fumigation has been done for an hour, then make her sit on a stone, make her sneeze and extend her mouth, lift her up, and press gently on the lower part of her belly, for the baby will soon be forgotten."
"On the emergence of the fetus lying sideways with one arm extended:" "It should be gently reduced into place by its hand. But if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman up and make her walk."
"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, strike its sides with vigorous blows, and administer liquids and mucilages which you have prepared."
"And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit on a stone, study how to reduce its arm, anoint the baby according to its natural figure, make the woman sneeze, and command her to push until it is forgotten."
"On the emergence of the fetus on its back with arms extended and face towards its mother:" "The midwife should hold the baby's hand and gently turn it around until it is easy."
"And when it has been anointed and it has become easy, then place on its face what we have recommended of oil and mucilages."
"And then command her to shake it gently little by little. And when you have done this, then make her sit on a stone and let her lean over her right side, and command her to push; and make her sneeze with incense." "Preparation for the emergence of the fetus onto its side:"
"When there are horrible cries from the mother according to this manner, consider, and then cut open the second one with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture."
"And if the baby is suspended over its face and its neck, then cut open that part with a caesarean section, so that it may not be retained and die."
And then push the fetus into the parts inside that are open, and pause that which is necessary, and tell the woman to take some breaths, and he himself will come out easily, if God wills it.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, although this is rare and strange and should not happen; but there are several causes for this, not alive.
And it happens sometimes that they are multiplied, one after another, and separated by a membrane, distinguishable those inside the ligament in the navel of each one. And sometimes they come out like this as if there were only one fetus through natural easy birth, and sometimes they come out through difficult birth like we have mentioned.
And if some of them have difficulty with childbirth and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you should take care of them as we have mentioned.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skillfulness, and with patience, and follows the method according to all figures as it was prepared for her by the master bringing about health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and miscarriages
Sometimes there are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten embryos, and it has been verified that one woman miscarried six, and another one all ten that were formed. The cause of this was made known through the measurement by the glorious wise men.
And therefore it is necessary for the midwife to know well this little figure of that which she may encounter, and thus she will be prepared for it.
Chapter LXXVI
Of the extraction of the dead fetus
When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet come out, and you wish to use an operation with the hand, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any of the accidents which could cause harm to her.
Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back with her hips elevated and her head lowered inward, and her thighs raised up.
And the assistant should hold both of her knees or she should be bound in that manner on the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should moisten the mouth of the womb with oiled honey and dough made from marshmallow, fenugreek, and sesame seed.
And then the midwife should grease her hand with those oils and doughs, and then gently insert her hand into the womb, and seek out with her hand where the hooks of the fetus are located.
And the convenient places for this are: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to come out on its head, and thus you should find the hooks in its heels or in the neck or in the mouth or in the palate or below the beard or in the clavicle or in the places near the ribs or below the hypochondria.
But if the coming out is on its buttocks, then in the perineum or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the hand and place the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the blockage.
And then pause and place another hook or the third if it is necessary, so that there may be equal attraction, and not only extension according to its nature.
And thus it should be done in all deliveries, so that the coming out of it is made easier just as it is done in teeth before their extraction.
And it is necessary that in that which is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to grease some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them and rotate them where it has been retained.
Therefore if the delivery of the fetus is delayed, then the hooks should be changed to another place where it can be more easily pushed out; and do this until the whole fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is extended before the other one and it is not possible to reduce it because of the constriction of it, then cloth should be wrapped around that one; and then extract that one until the whole is delivered, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
And thus you should do with the other hand and with both feet.
"If the head of the fetus is large, or obstruction occurs during delivery, or it is in the contracted pelvis, then it is necessary to introduce the said spina spatula and split the head to remove the water, or use an instrument called 'alundat'."
"And similarly if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to use tongs, or use an instrument called 'alundat' as we have said before; and promptly extract the bones with forceps."
"If the head is exited but stuck beneath the pubic bone, then it should be split open so that the fluid in the cavity may drain out."
"But if there is no complication and no obstruction to delivery, then you should incise the head immediately as soon as it is possible for you."
"And if the left side of the abdomen is inflamed or there is a hydrocele, then it is necessary for you to puncture that area so that the fluid may be drained."
"But if the fetus is above its own weight, then its attraction will be lighter and its direction towards the mother's mouth will be easier."
"But if it is stuck beneath the abdomen and the cavity, then you should extract it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and cavity so that water may flow out from them."
"But if the other members are out and the head turns back, then insert your left hand; but if the mother's mouth is filled, then insert your hand into the bird's throat, grasp the head with it, and pull it with those instruments into the mother's mouth, and promptly insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with them."
"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an abscess that has formed there, then it should not be troubled over it; but at that time it is necessary to administer evacuation of thick moist causes." "And apply plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten."
"And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible it should be turned; and it should be administered as we have said for a live fetus."
"But if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and it should be extracted."
"And you must not leave any cause behind inside the uterus."
"And when you have completed all your operation, then administer as we have said for the treatment of burns that have occurred in the mother."
"And if bleeding occurs, then apply lint soaked in astringent waters and administer the other treatment."
"And I have already seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus, and she became pregnant again promptly thereafter, and the other fetus was also dead." "It happens that an abscess forms in the womb for a long time; it swells inside until it bursts, and it begins to discharge watery blood."
"And I was called to treat it, and I treated it for a long time, but the ulcer did not heal."
"Then I applied plasters of strong attraction for these causes, and after some days an bone came out from it, and again after a few days another bone came out. And I was greatly amazed because there are no bones in the womb."
"And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
"So I healed the ulcer, and extracted many bones from it, and the woman remained in her usual condition, and she lived thus for a long time with only a little discharge of watery blood."
"And I do not affirm that this is strange, but rather it shows that in this there is science and help for what the skilled physician administers with his hand by means of treatment."
"Of the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus."
"The shape of a hook with which the uterus is dilated:"
"This is the form of the dilator on which the threads are wound, and to this winding are attached two hooks at both ends of two strings." "But this hook must be more slender than the dilator, and it should be made of silver or of wood from boxwood."
"And each rod should be two fingers wide and one finger thick at the edge of each, and each should be a hand and a half long; and in the middle of both rods there are two attachments for that same rod which are already fixed, each of which is about a hand and a few digits long, and each is two fingers or a little more wide."
"And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it may be dilated with them when you turn the two specified hooks."
"Another form similar to this, but more slender and lighter:"
"It should be made of silver or boxwood according to the shape of forceps." "But at the end of it there are two attachments like this, and each attachment is about two fingers wide."
"And when you want to dilate the uterus with them, then have the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between the lips of it." "And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps when wound according to how much you want of the opening of the uterus, until it is as wide as you wish."
"The shape of the hook which the ancients called:"
"The shape of an elevator with which the fetus is pushed out:"
"The shape of a scoop with which the large head is covered"
"And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, with teeth like those of a rake with which it is inserted and covered." "The shape of a small scoop:"
"The shape of a hook having one spine:"
"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
"The shape of tongs having two ends with which the head is cut off:"
"The shape of two wide-spaced tongs:"
"All these instruments are used, and the more species there are of it and the better prepared they are by the artisan, the easier his operation is and the greater benefit he brings to men because of their quantity."
"And do not neglect these instruments, whatever they may be, for the use of them is not excusable."
"Of the extraction of the secondine:"
"When the secondine is retained during childbirth, then you should command the sick woman to hold her breath, and immediately make her sneeze with conditions, and stretch your hand over the mouth of it and over her nose, and if it comes out by this means, so much the better."
"And if not, then you should take some water and pierce it with a straw, and boil these herbs in that water to wash the mouth of the uterus: calamint, rue, aneth, camomile, scordium arabicum, cassia lignea, and centaurium." "All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cauldron, and then boil that over the fire."
"And immediately place a reed cannula into the mouth of the uterus, so that steam may come to the concave part of it."
"Then make the patient sneeze as we have said, and quickly remove the second one."
"If the previous treatment is not effective and the stone is not expelled, then order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in an infusion of marshmallow, and with this she should enter the vagina and seek out the second stone, and once found, carefully extract it little by little. But if it is stuck in the entrance of the womb, then insert your second hand as recommended earlier, and when you have found the second stone, remove it gently according to the correct procedure so that the uterus does not suffer excessive traction." "The sheets should be changed on both the right and left sides with ease."
"If the mouth of the womb is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication using olive oil with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes that we have mentioned, then make sure you do not tire yourself out in your efforts to remove it. However, what comes out of there should be placed on a cloth near the woman's genitals, and then it should be cauterized with pitch and tterafarmacon; for this will cause it to dry up little by little and dissolve and eventually come out."
"But when it dries up, it causes a bad odor in the head and stomach, which leads to illness. And at that point, fumigations and other appropriate remedies should be administered for this condition."
"But some of the Ancients were already aware of the use of fumigation with nasturtium leaves and dried figs."
"Method for using an instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of menstruation and lochia:"
"Let bloodletting be done or a plaster applied."
"And let the narrow end be placed in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and gentle fumes be placed over the embers of the fire."
"And hold that until that gentle fumigation is consumed, then repeat another."
"Treatment for an unperforated child's buttocks."
"The child's navel and buttocks are not pierced; they are still subtle and closed." "Then tell the midwife to pierce that navel with her sharp needle; if not, pierce it with a pointed needle, taking care not to touch the skin."
"And then place this linen soaked in wine and oil on it, and carefully clean that wound so that it may be healed."
"But if you fear it is closed, then place a cannula in the wound for several days until the child wants to feed."
"And if the wound closes due to a consolidation or an abscess, then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised and properly treated with what we have mentioned about treatment and lead."
"Regarding the treatment of fistulas that develop from these wounds."
"The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and thick, those that develop near the anus outside or in the space between the two cheeks."
"And it is one fistula or several."
"And since this swelling is ancient and comes from moist, thick white humors or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas have some penetrating openings."
"And these openings are known through that which is issuing from them by way of exit and windiness; sometimes the patient expels it themselves, and often worms come out."
"And sometimes these fistulas enter into the urinary bladder through those penetrating openings, and also into the flesh of the penis; and some of these openings extend to the junction of the thighs and into the groin."
"And the way to recognize a penetrating fistula entering the anus and not visible from the outside is by placing your little finger inside the anus and then probing gently with a fine thread of silk or iron until you reach the fistula."
"But if there is tortuosity (twisting) in that direction, then insert a fine thread of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel it brush against your little finger."
"And if you do not feel it at all nor perceive any cause of expulsion, worms, or windiness as we have said before, then you will know that the fistula is not penetrating, and therefore you can proceed to its treatment."
"And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is urinary leakage from that area, and prohibition of its use until the place is healed as it should be according to medical practice."
"But if it penetrates into the junction of the thighs or into the bone and its surroundings with pain in the affected area, then the sign is that the probe passes through there if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and pain at the outset; and that pus always issues from there, and that nothing helps, nor does it heal with ointments."
"And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is a matter of discussion among foolish physicians on which we do not stand firm."
"But in that one which is not penetrating and is not ancient, healing with iron is expected as I will recommend to you, and what I have already said."
"And the disease causes pain between his buttocks, more particularly on the left side and elevates the cheeks of the buttocks, with the thighs inclined towards the belly of the patient. Then insert a probe of lead or iron if there is tortuosity in the fistula until you know where it passes."
"And if that person feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your little finger into the anus."
If you feel the tent through your finger and it is already exposed penetrating, or if you feel something between your finger and that flesh, then certainly know that it has penetrated; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that area.
However, some say that it is healthy in some men to be hard-hearted.
And the treatment by which it is hoped that the patient will be benefited is this: you kindle a cautery with great subtlety according to the width of the fistula, as was previously described, and insert that burning iron into the fistula until it reaches around the buttocks; and apply it again two or three times until you know that all those flesh joined by the fistula are already burnt, like the feathers of a bird's quill.
And then dress that with wet bandages wrapped in wool until all those burnt flesh are healed, and afterwards dress it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, good. But if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment at any time.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate within the depth of the said buttock, and there is some space between that and the probe which is wrapped in flesh or cloth, then open the fistula where its surface is level with the spine, and cut off the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and insert the probe into the fistula until the incision reaches to the place where the end of the probe arrives; and through the probe it will be freed and cured.
And then clean those flesh joined by the fistula which are like bird's feather quills, so that they do not break off for any reason.
But if blood often flows between you and your operation when you touch those flesh, then it is a wound, and it should be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire is suitable for two habits: it joins those joined flesh together and cuts off the blood and dries out the moisture.
And then dress it with wet bandages wrapped in wool or cloth until the place gets warm; and then cure the wound with medicines that generate and consolidate hard flesh.
And those medicines are astringent and drying; when it is restored, then it will be healed and there will be no recurrence.
"However, if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and extends beyond its surface, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it."
"If you find the vessel, and between it and the rectum there is nothing but skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it, but rather through faith and hope."
"There are three ways to manage this: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut into it until you achieve the concavity that allows you to enter the parts and facilitate healing; but do not proceed with cutting unless necessary so as not to damage the contents of the rectum, and so that you do not incur blame for acting against nature's will. Rather, treat it with what we have said if you want a speedy recovery. Or else extend this membrane and cleanse the pus from within the perineum, as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument with a sharp tip; then thoroughly wash these fistulous tissues which are in the sectioned area using a cauterizing method; finally strive to restore all the parts that were cut away." "And when the fistula is seen to be finished in this manner: namely, when you insert the probe into the fistula and it emerges from the surface of the skin around the anus or at the margin of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is shaped like a needle for preparing hearts thus:"
"And insert it into that opening wrapped in linen or cotton, and then insert the probe with the filament into the fistula until you achieve its concavity."
"But if it is penetrating into the margin of the anus from behind, then remove the filament from that passage so that you can insert your probe as described earlier. Then extract the tip of the filament and tie the two ends together with a knot; twist each end separately; leave this for one or two days; and when you have incised the skin around it, cleanse it thoroughly so that those tissues which are between the two ends of the filament become exposed."
"And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared yourself, but do so gently, for it is not your task to cause injury to the skin. And then treat it until it is healed."
"The shape of the spatha spinos used to incise the fistula is such that one end is very sharp and the other end is not sharp. This way you will not cut unnecessarily as often happens."
"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those (hemorrhoids):"
"Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they are between the buttocks resembling coal or they appear like growths of fat." "And those are small and large, from which blood always flows and is one, and there are many, and they are outside the anus, and at its extremities."
"But those that are outside the anus occur more often in those with little humidity, from which citrine water or a bit of blood continuously flows, and they vary in color."
"And the treatment for those inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and squeeze while they exhale, so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear." "Then you grasp with tweezers or your nail and squeeze those hard ones close to their roots."
"But if the tweezers do not hold those hard ones due to their humidity and softness, then take them with rough cloth or cotton or wool wadding, squeeze them with your fingers, cut them close to their roots, and apply some powdered myrrh near the incision, so that they are cauterized in place. Or else cauterize them as it was said in the chapter on cauterization." "And then treat those with the other cure until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a cautery having a small bite, and wash it with water that is in the anus so that it may evacuate easily when the patient squeezes."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is slight, and it suffices for you to grasp them with your nail or tweezers, cut them, and then treat them with water as we have said until they are healed."
"And if you make an incision, then administer sutures in this manner: take a thread and insert it into a needle and then pull the hemorrhoid out on both sides. Then make the needle penetrate into the root of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part that is far from the needle, and do this crosswise. Then tie the hemorrhoid tightly with the thread, and cut off the excess thread."
"And do this to all of them, leaving one alone without tying it, so that the superfluous blood may flow out from that one."
"And then put a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the anus, and put another one on the buttocks. Then command the patient to remain quiet." "And then leave that one inside until it falls off; and when it has fallen off, treat it with ointment or with another cure until it is healed."
"And since those are old and not useful for this medicine, it is necessary that you remove them with the point of a scalpel or with your nail until they are moistened and covered by pus on top, which prevents their consolidation; and thus cure those that have already consolidated."
"Then you remove them with a vehement scraping until the first blood appears and they are scraped clean; and thus cure those that have healed."
"Know that hemorrhoids, which are called the key of disease, are not round like the head of a nail, but they are found throughout the body and especially in those parts near the buttocks and rectum. And it is through these that you should examine them."
"And then it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the key be incised and held with forceps or a hook, and completely eradicated from its root; and thus cure it."
"If you wish, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in its chapter."
"But a verruca is a small, rough, flesh-colored bump with a round base that appears on the surface of the body, and many are found in children."
"The treatment for it [a verruca] is to stretch out and incise that [the verruca], or remove it with a file or a scalpel until it bleeds." "And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
"But a formica [wart] is a small, flat or fistulated bump on the surface of the body that appears frequently on the face. When it is touched, it feels like an ant bite and is found throughout the body."
"The treatment for it [a wart] is to take a quill from an owl or a vulture feather, and it should be thick. Place the quill on the wart so that its tip contains thewart within its circle; then rotate your hand with the quill so that you incise what is in the circuit of the wart, and press down on the skin around it, and thus eradicate the root of the wart."
"And if you wish, do this with a cautery needle or iron according to this method:"
"That the tip of the needle should be thin and blunt (i.e. not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when it is placed on the said part, its edge is sharpened and its rotation made easier."
"And if you wish to cauterize the wart according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery regarding anthrax."
"Regarding the forms of instruments used for giving cautery."
"Sometimes cautery is done with silver or lead or melted wax or dough. And sometimes it is done with those instruments which are small or large according to those that are used, for the one used in treating young children should be small; and those whose handles are curved or elongated, their cauteries should be small."
"The method of cautery that is large and rare:"
"That the head of the cautery needle above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and that at its distinction where the bag is tied it should be like this."
"And the lower extremity of it which is inserted into the bag should be blunt (i.e. not open) and thickened towards subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, i.e. the larger the ray, the wider the hole."
"And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder or sheep's wool are placed be one palm long."
"And it should be pierced with many holes around it, the space between which is equal to the thickness of the finger."
"And then insert into those holes strong boiling oil of unripe olives, or pour it around them. Then adjust the bag onto it [the cautery needle]; and when the bag is placed on it, tighten it at the head of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize each hole: But be careful to not let the medicine in the bag become too hot or too cold."
"And then the patient should lie on his back, elevate his buttocks, and place beneath them a cloth upon which he may rest or a towel. Then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; then insert it into the bag easily, and then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it with two hands repeatedly with vigor until all that is in the cautery is expelled into the bowl. Then remove the cautery and the patient should raise his buttocks against the wall."
"And if the medicine forces it out to emission, let him hold it thus until he can no longer. And if he sleeps with it overnight, it is more beneficial."
"But if you cauterize him in cases of loose bowels and emission of feces from the anus, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and thick cautery needle like those used for children."
"On the treatment of plague:"
"And I have already mentioned in the section on the treatment of plague what was appropriate for this book, and now I will say how those who are sick with it should be treated with medicine according to the complete regimen."
"I say that plague is differentiated according to what kind of plague is present and according to the place where the plague strikes."
"And the causes for which plague often occurs are such as: cutting with a sword or knife, piercing with a dart or scissors, striking with a lance or club or arrow, and similar things caused by many causes."
"But plague that occurs in the parts of the body is such as: plague that falls upon the head, neck, chest, abdomen, thigh, and similar things on the members."
"And I am recounting the treatment of certain plague wounds because this reasoning and rule may also be applied to other kinds of plague wounds."
"And I will begin with simple head plague wounds, because the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it was caused by a blow from a sword or similar thing, and the chain has been broken only on one side and it is a large wound and you fear that an abscess may follow, then promptly perform a cephalic incision and flebotomy on him and do not delay this; and draw out from him as much blood as possible according to the amount of its strength if there is no other cause prohibiting flebotomy, especially if the blood which has issued from the wound is little."
"And let the flebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part, and keep the patient from sneezing, drinking wine, and eating heavy foods."
"But if you prohibit some cause because of its minuteness, then let him be weakened in his diet and not approach meat or wine."
"And if an abscess follows upon the wound, then cut into it with oil boiled rose oil or with wine in which has been steeped."
"If you are certain of an abscess, then place a poultice on it, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not yet changed there around the powder which I will recommend shortly."
"And if the air has already changed there, then place a poultice on it until it is healed."
"However, if the wound is large or due to an incision and its edges are not aligned properly because of dust, then approximate those edges with stitches according to my instructions on wound closure."
"If the wound is already exposed to the bone and there's no retention of it but only a small suspension, then incise that area and properly cure the wound with medications. Restore the flesh appropriately in place of the cord. And command the patient to be fed on foods which are coarse: heads and entrails and similar things, until they recover."
"If you find putrefaction in the cord and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is purulent and remove it. And properly cure it."
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not severed by medications, then inquire about the artery. And if you find that one not incised, then incise it with a scalpel, or ligate it. And if necessity compels you to do otherwise than what has been said, then cauterize until the bleeding stops."
"And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore, you powder those with this powder, because they will consolidate before the air can change them."
"And the manner of making this powder is as follows: Take oil of sesame one part, blood of dragon's blood two parts, and resin of mastic three parts. All of it should be finely ground and sieved. Then fill the wound with it, and constrict it well so that it adheres to it, and coagulate it with the blood."
"And properly constrain that above with powders and let it be. And do not remove it while it is like this until it is well adhered, because the medicine will not desert it until it is healed."
"And sometimes you can use cautery alone when sesame oil and dragon's blood are not available."
"And this same operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to cover those with it and constrain them tightly. And these are fresh wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered."
"And if the air has altered them, and especially during summer time, then this powder is not intended for those wounds. But at that time treat those with what has been said above, such as applying these ointments: a mixture of white lead and olive oil, or flour paste with water and honey until they gain consistency; and properly treat those with the other remedies until they are healed."
"But if there is a fracture of bone in the wound and it is small, then remove that with a gesture (i.e., manipulation)."
"And I say here the treatment of fractures of the head as it is venomous."
"Regarding wounds of the neck:"
"But if the wound is on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound."
"But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to do but avoid treating it with anything that causes violent contraction, such as vitriol and similar things which cause pain to nerves. It contracts." "And do not apply any ointment to the wound because the substance of nerves is fatty and their continuity is with the brain, which is the father of all members."
"And if you treat it with light remedies like this: washing the wound with sweet water, sometimes infused in white or unrefined oil, and turpentine when washed with sweet water; and other minor remedies according to this manner, and moist ointments."
"But if the wound is large, then apply sutures or tie the lips of it, and properly treat it with powders until it is healed."
"But if the wound has depth or the bone at its bottom is broken into pieces, then make a hole in it at the lowest point."
"But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then separate or dry that, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary."
"But if the cervical vertebrae or all of them have been injured but the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the windpipe and do not touch it; bind it evenly and reduce it to its natural figure, and properly treat it with bandages decently stretched, leaving it for some days; and properly treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed."
"But if the wound goes deeply into the bone and causes inflammation there, then percuss it. And if there are fragments of bone there, remove all those that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound becomes suppurated, separated, and its inflammation is relieved."
"And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you." "But if there is a fistulous wound in the wound, then treat it with that of which I will remind you properly in its chapter."
"If it is a wound made by a sword or knife and its depth varies, then consider whether wind escapes from the wound when breathing; if it does, know that the wound is mortal."
"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood, then put on it at first hour powder, but do not bind it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of it and return to the heart, aggravating the condition; rather put on a moist attractive ointment and wash it twice a day."
"And if the ointment is not available, then put cotton wool on the mouth of the wound so that it sucks what comes from the humidities; and make sure the patient sleeps over the wound so that what is collected there runs."
"But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm nor heart failure nor respiratory difficulty in the patient, and other dispositions are good for him, know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with bandages and other remedies until it is healed."
"But if the healing of it is delayed and much time has passed, know that a fistulous wound has already formed. Then treat it according to its chapter."
"And if the wound is made by a slash or knife and is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then treat it with what has been mentioned about sutures if it is large, or powder if it is small."
"But if inflammation has already occurred in the bone and pieces of it have been cut off, then twist the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separated." "But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound becomes suppurated, as their extraction will be easier then."
"And regarding other accidental wounds in the other members, the remedy in treatment is the same as what we have said."
"Regarding abdominal wounds."
"The condition that occurs in the belly may be great, small, or moderate."
"And a small rupture is difficult to repair by another method, and so its reduction is more difficult if you don't promptly perform its insertion back into its place, because if it breaks open and becomes swollen then its reinsertion is made difficult."
"And therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as is difficult in both kinds mentioned before."
"And you should know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for the suturing of other wounds on the body."
"And the other two sutures are more specific to the belly wound, although they can also be used for other wounds."
"And I recommend to you each one with its exposition and explanation."
"Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the hernia has come out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, there are two ways to do this: either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said, or because the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air."
"And therefore, when it is like this, you should then make an incision so that you submerge a sponge or cloth dampened in warm water alone, or with vinegar, celery seed, and spice, and dress the hernia with it until the inflammation has been resolved."
"And sometimes do this with wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation."
"And therefore, when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which marshmallow and mallows have been cooked, because this relieves the pain without much cause."
"But if the pain has not been relieved by this treatment, then cut the rupture a little with an instrument with which you have previously cauterized hemorrhoids."
"And the first treatment is better when it is proper that it not be cut, and there is no need to cut except in necessity and deficiency."
"What about the instrument? Describe its shape:"
"One part of it is cut sharp and the other not-sharp, with a pointed tip that is not too fine like a scalpel, rather it should be somewhat blunt."
"And therefore, when the wound has widened and the hernia has come out, then its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if possible, for this is better."
"But when the rupture is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on his back and elevate his hips as much as his head; but if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then elevate the head of the bed and raise the feet as much as possible."
"And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then always place your intention and consideration there so that the side in which the wound is may be higher than the other."
"And this should be done for both large and medium-sized wounds."
"And in small wounds, do what you have prepared for it, but especially make sure that the one who ministers is among your closest associates, who holds the rupture entirely with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and especially uncover from that to this so that the suturing may be done without any other cause."
"And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or count needles according to the amount of the width of the wound; and then leave it at the end of the index finger, and thread the needle with one thread, but do not put a knot in both ends of the string, with two threads of the gut that is on the left side of the string, so that you make this penetrate from there into that part; and now you have four orders."
"And then thread with doubled gut around the needle, and sometimes thread two parts together, and then attach both lips and the wound decently by suturing; and then leave the thickness of your finger and insert another needle there, and then tie it with gut like the first one with its needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
"And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, for thin needles cut too easily into the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the gut; therefore they should be medium in both thickness and subtlety."
"And it is not necessary to insert the needle into both ends of the gut at once, for if the flesh is cut too easily and the wound opens before its consolidation."
"And do not prolong the suturing so that the wound may not be hindered from consolidation."
"And then cut off the ends of the needles so that the patient may not be disturbed while sleeping; and then place over the suturing powdered breadcrumbs on both sides, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the wound is consolidated."
"And these kinds of suturing with needles are more convenient for small wounds, for it is enough to suture them with one needle or two or around those."
"But the second kind of suturing is common: it is that you suture the four ends of the gut and both ends of the gut in one go with a needle which has gut wound around it in subtlety and thickness."
"And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, so that the gut may draw up from the most elevated part of the wound, so that the suturing is like sewing with cloth, in which the threads are drawn tight."
"And place between each suture the thickness of your little finger."
"And this suturing is known to men."
"And with this suturing, I closed a wound that had been accidentally inflicted on a man in his belly who had been stabbed with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was issuing from the bowels around two palms of the bowel near the middle, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the bowel had been forced out by the wound for twenty-four hours."
"And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured that man and he is healed; and even now he lives many years after, and is well disposed in his affairs."
"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with any ointment, for it was in a place where no ointment could be applied nor any medicine, but I put upon the wound cotton dipped twice a day in honey water until he was healed."
"But I will tell two kinds of suturing proper according to the narrative of the Word."
"And it is that you begin with the suturing of the gut, and enter the needle from without to within."
When the needle enters the spine and that joint, following the straightness and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the needle in what has been pierced; then make the needle enter from inside to outside on the other end of the muscle.
And then when you have made it penetrate once, then make it penetrate again in that same joint of the muscle from outside to inside; and leave the end of the needle that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from inside to outside.
And then with that penetration where you make it penetrate into the needle at the end of the muscle which is on the inside, everything should penetrate.
And moreover, start from this same side and pull that with the end which is of the needle on the other side, and remove the needle from the spine which has penetrated, and then put it back into that spine and join the end of the needle which is on the other side with this end of the muscle; and remove that needle from the spine which is on the other side.
And do this once and again, and do it once more with one more stroke inside that you consider everything is done according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you should use skin sutures with which to sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the needle once from the side of the spine's end, and then leave it inside until you have completed it.
Moreover, the second type of suturing which is specifically mentioned by Guy de Chauliac, and this concerns only the muscle and its recommendation is that you sew it in half with the aid of some medicine, so that each part adheres to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the end of one side to the other end of the muscle, and that is done according to what I recommend to you.
You should leave the needle in the end of the muscle near the defect and make it penetrate into the interior of that part, leaving both ends of the needle outside; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the muscle.
And then turn those loops again, and make each loop penetrate from inside the interior part to outside the exterior part on both ends of the muscle except for that which is on the opposite side.
And this manner of suturing is better than common light suturing, and it is the type of suturing which I have previously mentioned.
This is what Guy de Chauliac said
Moreover, some say that abdominal suturing is corrected with two needles, so you should insert a thread into these loops and begin with the needle insertion from where it is necessary for you to do so, and make it penetrate inside the other side according to the suturing of those who sew the intestines equally.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen, abdominal suturing at that point is more difficult than elsewhere on the abdomen.
But the treatment of plague is judged by other plagues.
Which means that when you encounter fresh plague with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the wound and sew it up and dress it properly, then you apply powder of cinnabar on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then you apply to it some ointments which are present at that time before they make a hard crust and draw out the threads, and let them be consolidated both inside and outside; and then cure it like other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have medicines present at that time, then apply something to it immediately, for it begins to emit bad smell and soon changes color twice a day, as I have shown you, until it is healed, because you will not need other medications in many cases when the plague is simple.
But if you fear that the plague may communicate to the main limbs, then you should submerge lion's wool in good quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it around the area between the anus and leave it there.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in its bowels, which happens many times, then you should crystallize it with black treacle and vinegar, especially if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and an exiting wound has been made penetrating into its concavity.
And know that those which are in the large intestine have easier healing than those which are in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal that intestine which is called "gizzard" because it does not receive healing of plague that enters into it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and its great magnitude, and its subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is tissue, and you encounter it fresh, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce intestines equally.
But if it has passed some time and it has become green or black, then stretch it with thread over the location that is discolored from it, so that there comes out flow of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
And then incise that which is other than that thread and leave two ends of the thread pendant from the opening outside the plague so that you may be relieved of the attraction of it, because of the closing of the tissue and emission of the smell of the plague.
Reminder about plague when it occurs in the bowel.
When rupture occurs in the intestine and is severe, it may be possible to restore it in some men.
Therefore I pursued the treatment of him as if he were not destined to be cured, but rather to subtiliate that wound which had been healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw that the place was consolidated, therefore I advised him to pay attention to his health after this misfortune in his belly; and not to become too careless with his meals and drinks, but rather to enter between baths and exercise himself in his customs.
And some experienced ones have said that when rupture occurs in the intestine and is severe, it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: take frogs with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the rupture and place one frog of those that have their mouth open on the two lips of the rupture; therefore when it presses on them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And also place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this until you have used as many frogs as there is length of the rupture.
And then reduce it and close the rupture; those attached heads will remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed, without causing any harm to the patient.
And it is also possible to tie the intestine with a fine thread made from the gut of an animal, because it is more suitable for this purpose. Take the end of such threads and remove as much fat as possible; then tie the end of it with the thread in a loop knot, and insert that thread through a needle and sew up the intestine at the rupture, reducing it there.
And this method of suturing with frogs is merely a matter of faith and hope.
But if the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, because then it does not result in mere suturing but rather in merely a narrowing, and not a healing of the entire intestine.
Of the treatment of wounds and fistulas
Know that every rupture or abscess when it becomes hollowed out and ancient, and is not consolidated and continually discharges pus without being cut open, then in whatever limb it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it that wound.
And truly speaking, a fistula is a hard and rough nodule that is white in color and does not cause pain or discomfort, just like the concavity of the claw of an owl; therefore it was named "alcus rictus", which means "penis".
And in moist ulcers there is discharge of pus; but soon after the moisture is cut off, it becomes dry. Sometimes this moisture is abundant, sometimes scarce and thick or thin.
"All these causes have been explained, along with their symptoms and the treatments for them in the division [of medicine]."
"And it is also necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery using a scalpel."
"And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body. Some are related to large veins and arteries, others to nerves, the bladder, or some of the ribs, or certain vertebrae of the back, or certain joints composed by composition like those of the hand and foot; and there are also those that arise near the main member and similar ones."
"And therefore, among these fistulas, those that are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment are considered incurable. They are caused by carelessness, ignorance, and negligence."
"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places that have been mentioned, and you hope to heal it but are uncertain about its treatment, then take a probe made of lead or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, examine it with that."
"But if the fistula is tortuous, then examine it with a probe made of thin lead, because lead due to its weight will bend and follow the twists."
"And if the fistula emits horrible sounds, it is not possible for you to examine it with a probe."
"Therefore, relieve the horrific sounds with your sounds, because the moisture that you use to rinse it will also go down the other openings and channels."
"And properly inquire and examine to determine whether you have touched the ear or nerve, whether the fistula is long or short, whether it has many openings with horrible sounds that are all covered by the skin of its entire surface. Then with your full strength, examine the disease, discover the cause of the pain through pressure with your hand over the area, and similar signs and accidental causes related to an abscess."
"And once you have examined all these causes with true diligence, then proceed to the treatment with confidence. Consider whether the fistula is close or in a sound location, remote from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the other places that I mentioned earlier."
"Now dry out the fistula as it was said earlier regarding its treatment. Remove what is inside that filtration and any rotting flesh, and also remove whatever has been born from the opening of the flesh or the boil and similar things. Then cure the wound until it is healed."
"But if the fistula is deep and runs straight, then you should insert into it as much of the probe as possible. Then carefully remove all rotting flesh from it. Next, apply compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula that you have filled with iron."
"And do this several times until the sharp medicine has burnt away all the rotting flesh inside the cavity of the fistula."
"Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed."
"But if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended."
"But if the cause of the fistula is an ear injury and you are certain of this, then examine it and dry it out according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause related to veins, nerves, or main members as mentioned earlier."
"But if the ear is exposed and there is no rotting or blackness in it, then clean out that area until all rotting is removed. Then cure it with something that encourages flesh growth until it is healed."
"And if it does not heal and keeps oozing like before, then you should know that you have not yet achieved complete eradication of the rottenness. Therefore, uncover it again and carefully investigate its cause and thoroughly cleanse it with your strongest remedy. Then restore it."
"And if it is healed, then that's good. But if not, you should know that the rotting is deep inside the body and has not been reached. In such case, there is nothing more you can do for it."
"And if the ear is rotting and small, or if it is possible to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose."
"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave behind any cause with your full strength."
"But if you encounter any difficulty due to humidity during the incision, and there is no fear or mistake in its performance, then incise those membranes or flesh if it is present, and relieve the bones."
"But if you are not able to remove the bones at that moment, then place over the wound something that will prevent it from closing up. Leave it there until it is around those flesh and membrane bones, and guard the wound so that it does not heal and consolidate, and keep the section that you have incised in your operation open."
"Wait, if you fear that the wound may close up, place over it a poultice immersed in warm oil, or a poultice immersed in Egyptian pitch, or one of the green ointments. For when these membranes and bones are separated by ablation, attraction is alleviated."
"But if it is a large bone like the leg or arm bone, and only the surface of it is rotting, then clean out that area with a strong remedy alone until all blackness and rottenness are removed. Then restore the wound."
"But if a large part of the bone is rotting and the rottenness has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that up and completely incise it where the rotting has reached. Then cure it until it is consolidated."
"And I recommend to you what is suitable for a man in his thigh so that you place those things on it as examples and assistants during your operation."
"A young man of about 30 years old experienced pain in his thigh. An apostema had formed on the inside of the thigh, extending into the body so that the apostema was large. The cause was not external."
"And then much time passed with that because of the error of doctors in not opening up the apostema. Much matter flowed out from it, and its treatment was stopped until the leg became fistulous. Many openings appeared in the flesh around the wound which all released putridity and the humidity of the body."
"Then many doctors gathered around for two years, but there was little knowledge among them regarding this matter."
"And he saw the bed and the blood flowing from him, as if from a great wound; but his body was already stiffened and its color was yellow."
"And then I inserted my finger into one of those wounds and reached the bone."
"Then examine carefully all the orifices and find those which come from all parts of the chamber."
"And then you take and cut upon one of those orifices which you discover a part of the bone, and uncover that corrupted one, and it was already rotten and corrupt and dirty; and already a part of the chamber had rotted into which it had penetrated to the middle."
"And then you close that which I had discovered and prepared of the bone uncovered."
"And you knew it was not in the bone but in that corruption which you cut out and closed, and you had already removed."
"Indeed, we paused the restoration of the plague by consolidated medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated."
"And indeed you opened and discovered upon the bone secondly upon the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone."
"I closed what appeared to me from that corruption, and indeed you performed fair the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored."
"And then you discovered upon it again and did not cease to cut into the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it was not restored until you cut around about a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and indeed you restored that with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed."
"And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it unless for the disposition of the frailty of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance of it and fear of death because it lies in all hours for superfluity of evacuation and bad syncope."
"Therefore, healed is by entire healing, and nothing remains in place of hard flesh; and it is well disposed in its proper body and returns its virtue; and it has been converted in its dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in ambulation nor harm in any cause."
"But if it is prominent in place of the body already broken, then you should section it in this manner: and that you take linen and strengthen it on the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out thus; and pause that linen bandage as thick as the first bandage; and indeed lay it upon the flesh that is distant from the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh away from its sides, and you uncover the flesh on the place where you wish to saw, so that the saw does not touch the flesh."
"And pause a piece of wood or board on the side of the bone decently, for when you do this the saw is not prohibited from cutting the corrupt flesh."
"And it is necessary that the sawing be done little by little on the corrupted place, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, force may have to saw it again."
"And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it; therefore you uncover the flesh from all parts altogether; and indeed pause wood on that side, and indeed saw it from the first part where the corruption is until it is continuous with the sawing of the other part."
"And let the sawing be done according to the place of the corruption little by little, as we have said."
"And if the corruption is at the joint, then incise that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it is continuous with the other part."
"But if from the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not reasonable but ingenious."
"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot it is very difficult; however you should inquire how the corruption appears to you, and remove that, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with every ingenuity correct what you can, so that it does not harm vein or nerve."
"And know what are the incising tools and the saws for incising these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore you should prepare all kinds of appropriate instruments for that operation."
"And know that this operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument which you need; for when you have great study and long experience in the ways of this art, and knowledge of the ways of illnesses, then already you would have by yourself what is convenient for each illness among the instruments."
"And I will tell you in conclusion of this chapter the number of instruments which you will prepare with them simply with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others." "Forma de serra:"
I'm not sure what you're asking. Could you please provide more context or clarify your question?
Large saw form:
"Rasp shape:" "So that the head of this rasp is according to the shape of a star-headed key head, and its points are according to the shape of astraphox points."
"And it is not convenient but that with this should be rubbed the heads of joints when they are corrupted or if the mouth is wide open."
"Form of smaller razor:"
"Broad razor shape:"
"Form of another saw properly made: let it be made in the form of a bow, its sharpness of iron, and its member made of well-made bone awl." What do you mean by "forma de lu"? Please provide more context. Do you want to know the shape or form of something specific?
"Form of razor with concavity:"
"Form of another subtle razor:"
"Form of another razor with curved tip:"
"A small knife shape resembling a lance."
"Form of another smaller incising tool:"
"Form of another incising tool: this one resembles a rasp, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of bones:"
"The shape of the rasp which is convenient for the ratio of that which is perforated by the bones:"
"And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp tip."
"And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes that we have said about razors and incising tools and saws."
"Of bone incision extremities and of bone sawing."
"Extremities can be affected either by intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes, whether you have medicated that corruption with curative medicines and the cure does not occur, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which you do not perceive for any cause; therefore it is necessary to incise that member where the corrosion approaches, so that the illness escapes through that opening from death or harmfulness that is greater damage to the member."
"And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it was covered by fire, or the darkness approaches where putrefaction has entered into that member which seizes it and takes all the body; therefore it is necessary to incise that."
"And similarly if corruption is caused by the percussion of some venomous causes such as those of sea scorpi
"And if the corruption or percussion is at the tip of the finger, therefore you must incise the finger and not give space for the corruption to go into the hand."
"And similarly if it reaches the hand, therefore you must incise that at the radius of the forearm, and not give space for corruption to take hold in the forearm."
"And if you lift that one up, then cut into the arm between the elbow at the joint."
"And if another passes over corruption and envy near the joint, then death is there for the patient. And administering another cause other than that in cure is quantity of virtue."
"And likewise you must do to the foot when corruption reaches its end, then cut into it at one of the toes."
"And if you take the sole of the foot, then cut off all the foot." "But if it can enter into the knee, then cut into the back at the joint of the knee."
"And if corruption has already reached the knee, then there is nothing to do but remission, and leave the patient to die."
"The manner of cutting off a limb or sawing it is that you stretch the ligaments at the place where you wish to cut, and stretch another ligament over the spot. And extend one ligament towards both sides, and extend another ligament above them. And separate the flesh which is between two ligaments with a wide knife until all the flesh is exposed. Then it may be cut off or sawn."
"And it is necessary that bandages of linen be applied from all sides so that the spot does not touch. And that a proper and healed scar come to the patient."
"But if bleeding happens while working, then cauterize the spot carefully, or apply some powders that restrict blood. And return to your treatment until it is completed."
"And then bind the member with a bandage in whatever way is convenient, and care for it until it is healed."
"And I tell you this that happened to a man in his foot, the accident which I and you are discussing, which is the fourth of its kind that occurred on his foot with burn-like inflammation resembling fire combustion."
"And this corruption happened initially in his toe so that it affected all the foot."
"And then that man prepared to have the treatment done on his foot with great haste because of its severe pain and burning sensation. He cut off that foot at the joint, and it healed."
"For a long time afterward, that same corruption happened on his finger of the left hand."
"And then he came to me, and I treated him for that swelling with what I applied on his hand for medicinal purposes. And the swelling did not decrease, but began to go towards the other finger so that it began in the hand."
"And he called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the recession of that swelling. And moreover, I feared the cutting off of his hand because the power of the illness was in its root."
"And since he left me, he returned to his land and came back to me saying that that man had prepared himself and cut off his whole hand, and it healed."
"And I have not related this story now except to be helpful about what can happen with this illness, and that it may be a sign for which it is signified and according to which it should be treated."
"Concerning the treatment of sinus and the quality of cleansing with medicines."
"When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it ruptures and opens up, and the pus comes out, and the spot remains hollow like a vessel, and the cord that is above it appears thus like a thin cloth, and there is no return to corruption, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula."
"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus."
"And the treatment of it is to cut off that cord entirely as it is rolled up, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the spot because of its corruption."
"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption has not yet progressed further, and there is space in the cord for scar tissue to form, then you should treat it with a cleansing enema."
"And if you are considering the sinus, then if it is large and the arm that goes out smells badly, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, sour wine, and cinnamon received in equal parts, ground well together in a vessel, and cooked on the fire until it becomes thick like honey."
"And then take some of it that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey. And cleanse the sinus with it, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours."
"And then remove that with a probe. And do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the corruption is removed."
"And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not present. And if you take the ash of vine, and put it on top of the water, then boil that and cleanse with it until you are convinced that the sinus is completely healed."
"And if the illness does not tolerate Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey well mixed together, and cleanse with it wine and honey mixed together. For it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess thickness and dryness in the wine."
"And when you do this several times and you are convinced that the sinus has been removed, then cleanse it with something that causes flesh to grow there."
"And if you take some powder of diachylon and dissolve it with rose oil and thick wine, or cleanse with other medicines and ointments that have properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the tube of the cleansing, then widen it gradually with a small iron instrument, and pause there while covering it with Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment until it is widened."
"And similarly if the opening is wide, then sew up its lips with stitches and leave in it only the quantity into which you can insert the cleansing without adding anything else."
"And if the opening of it from which corruption goes up to its parts above is elevated, then dry that in the pus itself where it is located so that the arm may run freely downwards, for when the arm is confined within the tightness of a sinus, flesh will be produced there."
"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area of the pus itself according to your desire, then perform an operation on the member such that corruption goes out from it lightly according to what you have learned and that there is nothing retained within it causing obstruction."
"He who stands over the opening of the wound should remove that which is stuck in it at all times, lest it come out again from the arm." "And how to know if what comes out of the arm is too much or too little, digested or undigested?"
"And also consider the location of that wound: whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess."
"And when your treatment has continued in this manner for a while, and you see that the matter expelled from the wound is now adhering, then on the third day untie it. And when you untie it, immediately change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment."
"But if from the wound a subtle virus escapes over a long distance, do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it will be appropriate; because some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others have rapid."
"And if after many days the arm remains undigested, you will know that the wound does not adhere. And if the adhesion of the wound is delayed and this is due to prolonged treatment, then adjust the drying properties of the medicines. And if the medicines are humid in substance and virtue, they should be dried like a fine ointment, when there is an excess of addition of zinc."
"And the final advice in this treatment is that you should take a little bit of ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on an ancient cloth, and apply that to the wound. And use it thus."
"And also do this action when there is no wound: take ointment and honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and use it. Or else take myrrh, aloe, and resin, crush everything together and powder it over the honey while it is on the fire. Then spread it on cloth and apply it to the wound. Also spread that same honey which you have cooked until it thickens, then powder it on cloth and apply it."
"And sometimes the treatment should be administered with long and thin roots of celery (which is celery) and flour of barley and centaure. Use these simples or adjust them, crush them and sift them and powder them over the honey that has been recommended. And use it."
"And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it. Then make an investigation in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments. Therefore treat it with fistular cure, as is said above."
"On the treatment of cornified and thickened nails and nail trimming and finger amputation and sectioning."
"Panarici is an abscess that appears on the nail of the thumb or toe of the hand or foot. It commonly occurs on other fingers as well. And when it is prolonged and its treatment is delayed, it becomes a chronic abscess, or it becomes corrupted and rotten, so that it eats away at the root of the nail. And often the entire nail is corrupted, and its corruption extends to the bone, causing a foul odor. And the tip of the finger becomes reddened, and the color of it becomes dark."
"And therefore when you have that which we have spoken of in the division and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cut away with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail. And also cauterize the wound immediately after that, because cautery is very helpful in this case."
"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the corners of the nail begin to press on the flesh inside, causing it to be pricked and painful, then you should make a subtle incision at the corner of the nail that is pricking the flesh, and push it up and cut away that flesh easily. And apply to that which remains of the flesh medicines that are corrosive until everything is removed. And then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
"But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should cut away the bone and extract it, because there is no time when bone that is corrupted will heal."
"And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger, then you should cut it off at one of its joints according to where the corruption is most prominent. And then cure it until it is healed."
"But if the nail receives a blow or bruising and there is violent pain in that place, then you should first perform bloodletting for the disease. And then dry the nail with a sharp spatha using a transverse section from top to bottom. But make sure that the section does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, because if it does, you will cause violent pain and cause excessive flesh to form in that place. And then cure that place with something that relieves pain."
"But as was said above, this condition is found in most men. It is often entirely flesh-colored, and sometimes it is on the bones or sometimes it is on the nail."
"And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some joints of the fingers." "But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not cause pain. And that which is born at the joints often causes pain."
"And of those that are born flesh-colored, the section is easy. And you should cut it off at its root with a broad spatha."
"But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult. And therefore beware of cutting it off."
"But in that which is born in the finger between the joints, you should first cut away the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone. And then saw it off with one of those appropriate saws for this purpose. And then cure it until it is healed."
"But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their joints viewed externally or by nature of the person who is born with it, or by scarring or burning of fire, or by resemblance, then you should remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form."
"And also put between their bandages pieces of soft wool soaked in rose oil so that they do not become consolidated too easily. And separate them with a thin sheet of lead if necessary, or put one between them to prevent consolidation as needed."
"And likewise, if consolidation occurs in some of the fingers on the palm, then you should remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and appropriate for the figure of the member."
"Regarding cutting off superfluities, there are six types."
"Vices are varicose veins. And there are six types of veins that are wrapped around thickly and full of melancholic superfluity which occur in many parts of the body. And they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in those who travel, work physically, or carry heavy loads."
"Therefore you should administer a purgative for the body of black bile several times with strong evacuation. And then perform bloodletting from the basilic vein."
"But the treatment of them with iron is done in two ways. The first way is to cut and draw out that black blood. And the second way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it."
"The section of it is done in this way: first moisten the leg with cold water from above so that the thick blood is resolved, which is like a sediment of the leg. Then press the leg of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the ankle with a bandage, and then cut the vein at one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with the tieue ma from below the leg upwards until as much blood as you desire has come out, which is enough for the patient's constitution."
"And now seize that one, and order them to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
"And perform the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is necessary for the patient."
"The elevation of their limbs is as follows: you who raises the patient's leg if it is movable and brings it close to wash it with cold water until it reddens and veins are filled; or let them be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not available until the limb is heated."
"And then seize the cord in the right side of the vein for section either at its beginning or end, or lower down near its root."
"And then open the cord with tweezers and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent to the touch, and it is necessary for the one who seizes that rope to decline to blackness."
"And then remove the cord with the evacuator and you will seize that white which should be a thread."
"And then put that vein away so that it may rise up and be separated from the cord, and suspend it with tweezers or a hook."
"And then seize another section close to that section for three fingers, and then strip the cord from above the vein until it appears."
"And then elevate that vein and cut it in another section near its root, and then pull out that vein and elevate it until it passes through the second section, and then pull out that vein from the section that is above it."
"And do that until you pull out that vein from the section that is above all sections, so that it may all be pulled out; and then cut it."
"And if you cannot succeed in pulling out and elevating it, then insert a needle with fine thread doubled over and tie that vein and pull it out, or insert the vein and turn your hand all around until it may be grasped." "And be careful that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate the vein and it will bring about illness through that injury."
"And once that has all been pulled out, then pause over the place of the plugged wound submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it so that it may be healed."
"And if the vein is constricted and has any tortuosity at which it may be wrapped around its parts, and is not straight as we have said, then you must cut over that at all parts of the tortuosity of the vein and at the places where it may be wrapped around it, and then suspend it with tweezers so that you may elevate it all."
"And be careful with your section that you do not cut the vein and that you do not plug it up, because it will be difficult to elevate if you do so; and use your discretion in this matter."
"Form of the incident in which a vein is severed:"
"It is not sharp like hooks and does not have a pointed tip so that it may not plug the vein; but rather it must be of thick flexibility, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness. There must be in it an excess thickness as we have said."
"Of the extraction of a vein from the leg:"
"This vein is generated in the cambas of the tail lands such as those found in Arabia and in the dry tail lands of India with little tenderness, where there is neither grass nor bush."
"And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the tail."
"And its growth is due to putrefaction that comes from the spine, such as poison coming from within the body by means of snakes and worms and crabs and worms generated between the spine and the flesh."
"The sign of the onset of its occurrence is that this vein becomes inflamed in the tail, and it begins to swell up at that place, and then it starts to come out from the location of that swelling which resembles a root of a plant."
"And then when the tip of it appears, you must wrap around that tip a weight of lead which weighs one drachm between two drachms, and bind it up and leave the lead suspended from the tail."
"And whenever some cause makes it come out at other parts outside of it, wrap that up with lead and bind it up." "And if it is prolonged, then you must cut off a part of it and wrap up the remainder; but do not cut that with a root-like edge because if you do so, it will be constricted and will go back into the flesh and will cause an aposteme and purulence in that place and bad ulceration."
"So that it may be gradually treated and extracted little by little, so that it all may come out from the end of it and nothing remains inside the body."
"And some men have said that this vein is as long as two cubits and ten digits, and I have heard of one which was twenty cubits."
"And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert a probe into the track of it and pierce that with a long probe through the body so that all that is in the material may be evacuated, and apply putrefactive remedies to that place for some days; and also cure it by means of the treatment of apostemes."
"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and many openings come to it, and each opening has several branch veins."
"And therefore cure it as we have said in the division and with what is said above."
"Of cutting for worms generated under the skin, called bovine ailment:"
"This ailment is called in some lands 'bovine ailment' because often it happens to oxen and there is a worm which is born between the spine and the flesh, which goes throughout the body pushing and pulling, and it is felt as it moves from member to member until it breaks the spine and comes out."
"And its generation occurs due to putrefaction of some humors such as happens with worms, serpents, earthworms, and ascarids in the belly."
"And it is feared for its malice because when it goes through the body and rises up to the head, and arrives at the eye, then it breaks in there and enters and destroys the eye, which happens often."
"And therefore when you wish to cure that and extract it, then it must be done by following its movement and appearance as felt by the senses, and then you must press down on what is above it and on both sides of it with binding and constriction, and thus dry up over it and draw it out."
"And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be removed, then apply a cautery with fire to that place until it dies there, for the greatest cause of concern is corruption of it with which it corrupts that place as we have said."
"And if you wish to prevent it from reaching the head near the eye, then press down on the eyebrow with strong constriction and also dry up over it, and draw it out; and this patient must use means of purification for his body using medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
"Of cutting for the ailment called 'nafir':"
"This illness is named in our land 'nafir', and it is pain that comes to certain limbs, which then changes from limb to limb."
"I have already seen what you recommended." "I was called to see a sick woman in a village. I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein near the elbow. After an hour had passed, I saw that inflammation move slowly upwards towards the shoulder, but more lightly than being carried by force, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place."
"And then pain came to that place and remained in the muscle. And this lasted for about an hour."
"And also it ran into the other chest until it reached the other arm."
"And he/she also told me to turn around so that I could see it all over their body, as much as I had seen. And they were too amazed by the transformation of the inflammation and its speed from limb to limb." "And I had already seen something like this before in my practice according to that manner, but I have rarely heard people say that pain is transferred from limb to limb." "But I did not see that in the wounds as with the woman."
"And I do not think it was anything other than because the woman was elderly, with rough skin and visible veins, and in this appearance that windy change of sensation seemed apparent."
"And it is necessary that this retro-cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with hidden veins."
"And when you want the cure of this inflammation, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to your eye as we have said. Then strike upon that place with your hand lightly and repeatedly until that windy sensation has gone out completely, and cauterize the place."
"But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that with friction of the body and with what drives out windiness, and apply those pills made from stinking herbs and pills of serrapie and similar things."
"Arrow extraction."
"Arrows vary according to species and the body locations they target. Their diversity lies in having large, small, concave, blunt, or solid points. Some have three edges, others tongues, while still others are star-shaped."
"If the arrow strikes the brain and pierces the skull, causing damage to the cerebrum above it, symptoms may include sudden violent headache, scotoma (partial loss of vision), vertigo (dizziness), ringing in the ears, inflammation and redness of the eyelids, confusion or mixture of thoughts, vomiting bile, difficulty speaking with possible loss of speech, and leakage of watery, whitish fluid resembling flour from the wound site, accompanied by excessive moisture similar to that of flesh."
"Therefore, if these symptoms are apparent, it is advisable to abstain from attempting to treat the wound or remove the arrow unless it is protruding outside."
"If the arrow strikes near the left nipple and is deeply embedded in hard tissue (not soft), with movement of the arrowhead resembling a heartbeat, accompanied by bleeding of dark blood from the wound site, coldness or numbness in the extremities, profuse sweating, paleness, and syncope (fainting), then know that death will soon ensue without delay."
"If the arrow wounds the lung, there will be frothy bloody sputum from the wound site, coughing or choking near the collar area, change in the patient's complexion, rapid breathing, shortness of breath, and urgent desire for cold air."
"If the arrow strikes the diaphragm (velum), located in the lower chest area, there will be pain near the lower ribs, and accompanied by rapid breathing with intense pain and sighing. All movements of the muscles of the limbs are weakened."
"If the arrow strikes the stomach, there will be vomiting of undigested food from the wound site."
"If the arrow strikes the abdomen and is embedded within it, there will be a visible wound or tear in the skin, tissue, or bowel which has been ruptured. There is little hope for recovery with such an injury, as extraction of the arrow would be futile."
"If the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled from the wound site, or if there are other signs of injury to external parts nearby, accompanied by intense pain over the affected area, then know that this is a fatal injury."
"However, other areas such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and joints of the backbone, collarbone, and sternum are considered safe provided that the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisonous."
"And I advise you to consider this information about arrows for your own use in treating such injuries."
"Why is it that when an arrow struck the tear duct of a man's eye during battle, I removed it from the other side near his ear and the wound healed without causing any damage to his eye?"
"And when I extracted another arrow that had struck a Jew in the socket of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact and then partially closing it, I could not find the arrowhead as it was already concealed. All that remained was a small extremity attached to his cheekbone, and it was a large, sharp Turkish arrow with a lion-shaped tip that had no barbs."
"And the Jew survived, without injury to his eye despite this serious wound."
"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the throat. It was an Arab arrow with barbs, and I cut into it between two guides and carefully removed it without causing further injury to the patient's throat, allowing him to recover."
"And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the abdomen and believed he would die from this wound. However, after thirty days with no change in his condition or signs of improvement, I made an incision over the arrow and carefully removed it, allowing him to recover without further injury."
"I once saw a man in whom an arrow had become embedded in his back. The wound became consolidated over time and remained there for about seventy years, until it eventually emerged near the sternum."
"I saw a woman in whom an arrow had become embedded in her abdomen. The wound became consolidated within her and did not change her physical condition in any way; she suffered no injury to her natural functions."
"I saw another man in whom an arrow had become lodged in his face and consolidated. The arrowhead broke off, causing him little pain, but leaving him with many scars like these."
"I extracted the arrow from the chief of the king's guards that had struck him in the middle of his nose and was already leaning slightly to the right. The entire arrow was concealed."
"And I was summoned to treat him shortly after he received the wound, just three days later."
"And so I first probed the wound from the arrow quite narrowly. Then I carefully felt around with my finger but could not detect anything. But he himself felt a pricking sensation just beyond his right ear, and I suspected that this was due to the tip of the arrow."
"I then widened the wound using an instrument with which I could attract and digest matter, believing that this would help me locate the arrowhead so that it could be extracted."
"But I did not cause any significant injury to the wound despite having reached the arrowhead. I continued using the instrument for many days without causing any further harm, and meanwhile the wound had healed over. Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reminded me of this."
"Then I applied a strong caustic medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up again. With my finger, I felt around inside and discovered the tip of the arrow adhering to his cheekbone."
"Then I continued applying the strong medicine until the wound opened up enough for me to see the tip of the arrow clearly. This took approximately four months."
"Then, once the wound had healed enough for me to insert forceps and grasp it without causing any further harm, I continued trying various techniques of extraction using different types of forceps, as described later in this chapter. Finally, one day I managed to grasp it with forceps designed for downward extraction and pull it out. Then I restored the wound."
"Some physicians judged that the cartilage of his nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it and the wound healed completely. He regained his health entirely without any further complications."
"I remind you of the method of extracting certain arrows because I will provide a rule and explanation for what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood through narration nor those in the book."
"The wise artisan compares little about matter, and about what is present rather than what is absent; furthermore, he discovers new operations and new instruments as needed for the removal of foreign causes of the art when they occur."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the limbs into which they are inserted, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place where it entered or by the contrary of the other part."
"And that which is thrown out by the place where it entered is either a procedure in a fleshy location, and is attracted and forced out."
"And if it does not obey the exit of the wound at that time, then you should leave it for a few days so that the flesh around it can heal, and thereby alleviate its attraction and exit."
"And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey the exit at that time, then you should leave it for a few days and repeat it with attraction and movement each day until it has been forced out."
"And if it does not obey the exit even after a few days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl so that the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it."
"But if the arrow has already been swallowed in the place of the body and is obscured from sensation, then you should search for it with your hand, and if you feel it there, then attract it with some instruments which are convenient for attracting it."
"And if you cannot get hold of it due to the constriction of the pleura and the length of the spine, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then incise upon the pleura until it is widened so that it will be possible to extract the arrow."
"And if it is in the ear which is being held, then deliver the flesh into which it has been inserted on all sides with all possible means; and manipulate that area until you achieve its evasion through fracture of the ear bones or torsion of those parts so that it will obey."
"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use torsion of your hand and forceps on all sides until it makes that part obey; and act with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and so that it will be difficult to attract it and extract it."
"And if you cannot succeed with that at your time, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it can be mobilized, and then repeat that because it will now have been alleviated." "But if you have trouble with the flow of blood, then administer what we said about treatment in its chapter."
"And preserve your skill in incising veins or nerves, and administer all possible means of the evasion of the arrow with facility, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as we have recommended."
"And once you have contracted the arrow, then perform traction according to the figure according to which the casing of the arrow was placed inside it, because this is more advantageous." "But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to those figures."
"But those arrows which are fired backwards due to the contrary part of another part, or where some part has already proceeded from it into its outer parts, or where there is hardness in the extremity of the arrow due to sensation of the flesh above the spine and it becomes prominent; then cut upon that; and make the section according to the quantity which the forceps can grasp; and then attract it because it will be easy to extract."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand contrary-wise until the arrow presses against the bone and widen that place, and then extract it."
"And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that when it has healed."
"If the arrow's shaft is in that [joint], then you push it with that."
"But if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer traction, then insert that [tendon hook], if it's hard, use a curved instrument concave on its end so that between the concavity of it and the tip of the arrow you can apply traction and pull it out."
"But if the arrow is concave, then press that with a tool entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by that."
"And if the arrowhead is barbed, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where it entered, if it is possible for you to do so, and then cauterize it with whatever is appropriate."
"And if the arrow pierces the bone or the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut upon it, then cut above it and guard against injury of veins or nerves, and extract it, and apply a dressing if necessary, and care for it until it heals."
"Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
"The ends of them should be like the beak of a bird, which are made serrated so that they may not let go of the arrow."
"And of those are made various sizes, large, small and medium ones, according to the quantity of the size of the arrowhead and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the thickness of the flesh."
"Like a rod, so that it may relieve the entry into the flesh around the concave arrowhead and is pressed with it."
"On flebotomy of veins."
The veins of phlebotomy, customarily opened for phlebotomy, are thirty in number. Among them, sixteen are on the head. There are two pulsating veins near the ears, called auricularis by some. Two veins are in the temples that appear to be twins; two veins are in the lacrimal ducts of both eyes, called aspicientia; and one vein prepared at the middle point of the forehead, and one vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the throat; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are called algelic; and there are two veins behind the tongue. The veins that are opened for phlebotomy in the arms are five. Among them, one is cephalic and runs on the outer side of the forearm; it is called "the vein of the head" by the people. It is also a median vein composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. The people name that vein "vena de tot le cors". Basilica is the vein located on the inner side of the forearm, called "citillar", or "vena del ventre" in common speech. The veins of the arm are three: the one placed above the elbow, which is opened for phlebotomy and appears clearly at the pulse; and the salvatella, which lies between the little finger and the ring finger, having two branches.
And in the thigh and leg there are three veins. One of them is located near the curvature of the little toe on the outer side of the thigh; another one is called sophena, whose location is behind the knee on the inner side of the thigh; and the third vein is sciatica, found behind the knee on the outer side of the thigh. There are other veins in the leg that resemble those mentioned above.
The veins near the ears have been found useful for treating ancient diseases such as catarrh (sinus congestion), migraines, and skin conditions like eczema and ulcers on the head.
The method of bleeding these veins is as follows:
Approach and take the lancet knife, which is pointed, and then insert it into the vein in the elbow before the phlebotomy comes to the bone. Then raise your hand gently over the vein and arm at its divisions, and cut into the vein with an incising incision. Make the length of the incision about two fingers wide or thereabouts, and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then press with a powder and bandage that area until it is healed
And as previously stated at the beginning of this book, those who have been cut and cauterized
The benefits of phlebotomy from the two veins, arterial or venous, are useful for treating ancient migraine headaches and chronic diseases, as well as eye disorders that are persistent and excessive humoral fluids in the chest.
And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the illness by its cause until both veins appear clearly at the surface and their pulse can be felt, then proceed with caution.
Then raise the arm over the vein at its divisions with your little finger and insert the phlebotomy lancet deeply, then raise the vein up and cut into it as you have done with the other two veins. Let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
"Then gently unbind the patient's ligature, place your thumb over the vein for an hour, then apply pressure to that area with cotton and powder, tightly binding it in place until healed."
"They were already preceded by memory of them, and their inscription and attraction from the beginning of the book."
"And thus the procedure of phlebotomy on the frontal vein is properly called phlebotomy of the cephalic, used in ancient times for ailments of the face and migraine, pain and foul ulcers."
"The quality of the phlebotomy of wool depends on what I recommend to you; it is that the patient should tighten their collar with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument, named 'fossor', which has this shape:"
"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the fossor onto that vein and pierce it with a pen or other tool in this manner, then allow the blood to flow according to how much you desire; finally, remove the needle from the patient's wound and tighten it until healed."
"And sometimes it is useful to perform phlebotomy with a lat tool, but the flebotomy needle does not need to be of acute extremity like the others, so that its lateral extremity can cut across the transverse plane as the bone is close and hard, which could break the flebotomy needle if it were too subtle."
"But the benefit of these two veins that are in the lacrimals of both eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to itching and sebaceous matter in the eyelids, as well as illnesses of the face."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient should tighten their collar with a bandage and then have it performed on them, while you are standing over their head."
"And let the phlebotomy be done across the length of a little with a fine flebotomy needle, because in that place there is not much flesh, and if the flebotomy needle is too subtle, it may break."
"And then let the blood flow until you have enough, and press on those dots for a little while, and tighten it overnight, and finally remove it."
"But phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent sneezing, as well as illnesses of the face, migraine, and itching that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
"And the quality of phlebotomy of this vein is that the patient should tighten their collar and then place their nose in your left hand, and take a subtle flebotomy needle that is long and insert it into the middle of the head of the nose vertically, because the vein does not appear here by touch, and because the blood begins to flow soon."
"It is necessary that you withdraw your hand little by little with the flebotomy needle and let the blood flow according to your needs; then tighten it overnight because that vein is easily restored."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy of both guides is for constriction of the throat and the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other illnesses such as itching and malignant ulcers that are corrosive like herpes."
"And the quality of phlebotomy of those veins is that each patient should tighten a cloth around their own neck, and the practitioner should stand over the head of the patient, while the patient is seated on a stool."
"And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with an ample flebotomy needle little by little, and let blood flow according to a moderate quantity or as much as is necessary at that time, and do likewise for the other vein."
"And then untie the cloth and tighten both veins with a midrib ligature so that the patient is not fainted, and let them rest for the night because the inflammation will be healed by morning."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy of the veins on the arms is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, malignant ulcers and fissures, as well as malignant ulcers that are present in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of phlebotomy of those veins is that you should have the patient sit before you, and tighten their collar with a bandage, then roll back the lips and look for two veins where one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its darkness, and more so because there are small black veins around them, and then incise each according to incision."
"But if there is doubt about which one it is and you do not know which of those veins it is, then go ahead with the incision of the largest one, or the one that has evident pus."
"And do likewise for the two veins that are in the lips above."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy of both veins on the left side of the tongue is for fainting that occurs in the stomach, for inflammation of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth."
"And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you should follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, elevate their tongue, and look for it on the left side where one vein is on one side and the other vein on the other side, and each has a color inclining towards darkness."
"And then phlebotomize each one of them, but be careful not to withdraw your hand with the flebotomy needle from those veins because they are arteries."
"And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those that are commonly found in all men, and phlebotomy of them is done in two ways: either by puncturing with a flebotomy needle of mulberry or olive shape with subtle inclination, or by cutting with a scalpel-shaped flebotomy needle, called an lance, and this is the way it is done:"
"It should have its point like this, and it is used to open concave veins that are full of obvious thick blood vessels, and those that contain coarse, turbid blood."
"And this flebotomy needle is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it is used for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle, citrine-colored blood."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it lets out blood from illnesses that are on the left side of the stomach and the neck, and for whatever affects the feet and the belly."
"And it is recommended for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that vein, to be careful and cautious because there is an artery nearby, and if he errs in puncturing with the flebotomy needle, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding, so that it should not be punctured with a sharp flebotomy needle, but rather incised with a lance."
"And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then you should leave that and move to another vein, either find some branch of it or phlebotomize at the end of the arm where it is visible, and incise with a lance-shaped flebotomy needle as we have said."
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, first place yourself in front of the bend of their arm and touch the spot within that you know is the pulse point. Then signify it with a cloth. Next, raise the arm and cut the vein with an incision concave like those we have mentioned; be careful not to strike too close to the artery space.
When you press and there is no swelling at the point you indicated with a cloth, then that swelling is an indication of the artery. Thus avoid that area.
If blood flows in the phlebotomy like a child's urine stream and is thin red, know that it is arterial blood. Then stop and pause your finger on that point for some distance; then remove your finger, and if the blood has stopped, many times it stops, then squeeze the arm and let that be.
And watch out for the patient's mucus, and be especially careful about them and do not move them for a few days until they are healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and you are present without medicine at hand, then cut the artery if it appears before you; for its end is contracted and the blood is stopped. Or take a piece of soft cloth or lint, apply that to the wound, then take another cloth and press that over the vein with pressure downwards using linen and cotton pads on either side for one day.
And then if the blood is stopped, that's good. But if not, then treat it with what was mentioned earlier about powders stopping the flow of blood.
And the arresting of the bleeding from there is difficult in many dispositions due to the smallness of the wound and the possibility of the linen of the arm.
But phlebotomy from the dark vein is useful for drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and from below the shoulders because it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And be careful during phlebotomy that you do not strike a nerve in the phlebotomy of it because below there is a nerve; and therefore if it hits upon the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, numbness occurs and healing is difficult. And often that nerve appears to the touch; but sometimes it is hidden in some men and is subtle and does not show itself, then you should pause the phlebotomy with which you are performing the phlebotomy with a little cut of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves then cut along the length of it.
The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it draws off blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes.
And particularly in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive-shaped phlebotome or a myrtle-shaped phlebotome because it is the safest of all veins since there is neither artery nor nerve below.
But often an aposteme occurs in some people when it is not cut with the first percussion, but do not notice that aposteme.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution against the occurrence of illness, and that it should be performed in one of the veins which are on the elbow, namely the cephalic, dark, and basilica veins; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and near meals in winter when there are signs of repletion.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least three hours after the first meal.
But phlebotomy should be administered when it causes convenience and necessity for it, whether night or day, at any hour and at any time.
And children should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years of age should not be phlebotomized.
And whenever anyone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason whatsoever, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's clister if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw up the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels which are cleansed and do not harm the principal members.
And patients with sacred nausea and drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until that has passed from them nor those with dropsy nor illness nor drunkenness; and particularly phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting and abdominal pain and copulation and effort and exercise of fasting or vigil or any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And particularly consider the subtlety of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And particularly take a bath if there is no cause preventing it or if exercised by some exercise so that the blood may be subtilized.
And pause phlebotomy of him during the foot of the day, namely about the hour of tierce, as we have said.
And particularly take care that the foot of that day is guarded from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, such as effort and superfluous pain and copulation and similar things to them.
And at his seat let there be present the causes in the use of which men usually employ aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the phlebotomist sit on a stool that is higher than the patient's stool who is to be phlebotomized.
And particularly extend his arm and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist twice or three times, and particularly strengthen the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice.
And let the ligature be moderate because if the ligature is too tight or if there is superfluity in it, then blood flow is prohibited; or if there is softening, then the course of the blood is hindered.
And particularly when ligating, he who is to be phlebotomized should rub his hands together between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the touch.
And particularly let the phlebotomist anoint his lancet with a little of proper old oil and particularly pause his left hand's finger on that vein where he wishes to perform phlebotomy so that the vein may swell slightly and percuss it so that among the veins there is one which throbs like a beating heart before phlebotomy, and among those it is full of windiness and when pausing the lancet upon it contracts before the lancet and is discovered by the phlebotomist; and the lancet does not wound the vein, and if it wounds, that vein is narrow.
"And therefore, for this reason it is necessary that the phlebotomist be stopped and he should be attentive to all these causes."
"Moreover, after performing the phlebotomy, if the vein is not full, it would be good to try another location nearby; but if this too is unsuitable or shows signs of inflammation, wait a little while before trying again."
"If the location is inflamed or if the patient's condition worsens, it would be best to leave them alone for a day or two, and not squeeze the vein too hard, as this could cause inflammation, nor should they enter into a bath."
"And in case of iteration of phlebotomy if the love."
"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then perform phlebotomy again on the same vein according to the rules and adjust the opening a little, and do this quickly before the location becomes inflamed, for many people have few openings."
"But if that location is already inflamed, then do not perform phlebotomy there again, as it will serve no purpose. Instead, pause for some time on one of the branches of the vein of oil, as this relieves the body's blood flow." "And it is better in this location than in any other."
"And similarly administer the vein of oil in all phlebotomies where veins are cut to stop blood flow. This is done with treacle, alfalfa, and sage when pausing on one of these locations, as this thins the blood and causes it to circulate more easily."
"And if a large inflammation occurs at the site of phlebotomy, as often happens, especially in someone who has not been bled before or where the opening of the vein was small, then apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt, slightly scorched, to the location for an hour, as this will dissolve it."
"And it is necessary that one does this appropriately with regard to the letting of blood from that vein with completion of it or from another vein."
"And if there remains in the location for a few days some blackness or greenness, do not worry about it. And if you wish, apply some mixture of Aloes and Myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of mint juice or chamomile juice, or something similar."
"And many times apostemata and prominences occur after phlebotomy in the basilica."
"And therefore place your hand over it and if you find softness under your compression, then that prominence is bad and harmful. And therefore guard yourself to apply some of what we have mentioned there, for much blood flows from the artery."
"And make an emplaster with something that has astringent properties so that the location may endure, and treat it with another cure until it is healed."
"And one must extract blood from every person according to their quantity of virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears."
"For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly if you find it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinned. And similarly if it is sharp, then let it flow until its sharpness has abated."
"And one must make the phlebotomy of someone who is full and strong and needs an extraction of blood on a single occasion large, and let the incision be wide."
"And in those who are thin, one must do the opposite of that, and extract blood from them in several sessions, and let the incision be narrow."
"And it is better to administer a transverse section in phlebotomy of a vein than puncture."
"And this manner of phlebotomy saves from flow of blood and incision of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude."
"And to one who is accustomed to fainting during phlebotomy, you must treat him beforehand with some bread infused in vinegar of hemlock or simple oxymel slightly scorched. And extract blood from him in three or four sessions."
"And if there is frigidity of complexion, then beforehand for phlebotomy take bread infused in an electuary of myrrh or in an aromatic electuary sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an electuary that is highly fragrant."
"And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy, and it is due to the letting of much blood, then one must take in drink beef water and a highly fragrant electuary. And use aromatics with aloe, and let him rinse his feet with that."
"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation."
"And he who wishes to eventuate his arm and dissolve his blood according to the second session, one must let the person from whom phlebotomy is performed for much evacuation, whose virtue is thin, that he evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days."
"But he who wishes to eventuate his arm and draw out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
"But he who wishes to draw out blood from his body contrary to the part that declines, one must let it be eventuated on the second or third day."
"But in that body where there is much blood already scorched and it is sharp and causes fever to occur, one must draw out blood from him in one session, and let much of the drawn blood be, and let the aperture be widened until fainting occurs. And let your hand be placed over his pulse during the drawing of the blood, so that death does not happen instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
"And when you wish to loosen the arm and evacuate blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to draw out blood, then press there with force and let him extend his arm gently, for this is very bad."
"Let him leave it until it is phlebotomized again; or remove that with the sharpness of the phlebotomy which has coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place there tyrian aloe, or sagazena, and press there gently until the blood flows out."
"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if there is cause for you to provoke evacuation of blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then let him be phlebotomized on that spot or on the other arm in another vein."
"And the vein called 'the rope of the arm' is phlebotomized in place of the furcula or the basilica when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those."
"And the quality of phlebotomy of him is that the patient should place his hand in cold water until the vein becomes engorged and appears manifestly."
"And let him be strengthened on that with a linen bandage with moderate tension; and let phlebotomy be done transversely, not lengthwise nor according to the length."
"And let the aperture be wide and let your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize him on the junction of the hand a little."
"And if blood flow is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose."
"But if it's summer and you're excused from immersing your hand in cold water, then place a cloth soaked in cold water on the body to slow down blood flow during winter."
"And the flebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, because the patient has no palpable pulse or nerves."
"And phlebotomy of the little vein on the right hand's wrist is beneficial for liver ailments."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is that you strengthen the hand by rubbing it with a linen cloth or your hand, after immersing it in cold water until the vein is inflated and clearly visible; then transverse flebotomy should be performed."
"And remember not to rub your hand too much during phlebotomy, as the nerves are exposed beneath the skin."
"And after immersing the hand in cold water, let the blood flow into that vessel, because if you don't immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent its flow."
"And once the blood has been extracted according to what is needed, you should then press over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not heal too quickly; similarly, do this for any other branch."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy from that vein on the left hand is that it is beneficial for stomach ailments."
"And do likewise in performing phlebotomy on this one as you did on the other."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for ailments that are below the body's surface, such as those relating to the womb, and retention of menses, and for ailments of the skin like scabies and ulcers on old wounds, and their similar ailments."
"And the quality of phlebotomy for this [person] is that the patient should immerse their foot in cold water and rub it until the veins appear clearly; then tie a bandage around the junction of the foot with a cord; and the location of the vein is evident near the ankle, and from there it branches out into several smaller branches on the surface of the foot."
"And therefore perform phlebotomy on one of the larger branches or below the ankle near its junction with the leg, because it is better and more salubrious."
"And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that lie beneath it and make your incision at an angle, as if you were cutting across it."
"And may God grant you skill in performing phlebotomy."
"But if bleeding is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in cold water and let the blood flow into that vessel until it is evacuated."
"And if the phlebotomist makes an error on the first attempt, then make another incision nearby because that location is safe; do not fear causing harm, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said."
"And similarly perform phlebotomy on the other foot with caution."
"And concerning the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said: near the ankle and behind the inner ankle bone."
"When performing phlebotomy on them, it causes hip pain due to bloodletting."
"The quality of the phlebotomy on them is that the patient enters into a bath, and quickly and strongly presses their thigh flesh on the inner side above the heel with four such cloths placed one by one using a long subtle bandage so that only this appears."
"Therefore, when it appears, you should perform phlebotomy according to each person's ability and according to their transverse vein, if possible, or else perform incision or sectioning according to the location."
"And it is common in many men but not harmful. And if you cannot find that one, perform phlebotomy on another branch of the vein that appears at the back of the ear facing the little finger."
"And beware of nerves, and let flow as much blood as you desire."
"Then untie the ligature and pause on the location of the phlebotomy until it stops bleeding, because it heals easily."
"And regarding suction and the quality of using them."
"Suctions are made of horn, bronze, or glass."
"And suction is done in two ways: one with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other without scarification."
"And this suction which is called scarification, is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire."
"And the places on the body where suction is administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen in number, of which one is placed at the forehead, which is the last part of the head; another is midway between two parts of the neck; suction on the chin below the jawbone but above the mouth; suction on both shoulders; suction over the hip joint, which is near the buttocks; suction on both thighs."
"And bloodletting does not remove the blood from large veins, but only from small ones scattered throughout the flesh, so that virtue is not lost through it as happens with flebotomy; and it is not necessary for bloodletting to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the entire body has been evacuated."
"But if bloodletting is provoked by illness or by continualpletion, we administer it at any hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of it, and at any other time."
"And therefore when there is an increase in any of these causes, especially if it occurs in the third or middle of the month, we order bloodletting to be done three days or two days after that time."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when it causes heaviness in the head and dizziness, it must be evacuated appropriately throughout the entire body."
"And this bloodletting is done at the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein."
"But it is not allowed to use this method in those who have a fat constitution, or in those with catarrh, because it causes great harm."
"And therefore, it should not be used for the elderly, and for those who have illnesses caused by heat."
"But those who are continually subjected to it will suffer from forgetfulness. And therefore, it is necessary that you command the bloodletter not to press his hand too much on the vein at the beginning, so as to avoid generating forgetfulness."
"But bloodletting of the right arm is done at the location of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it causes asthma, constriction of the lung, splitting of the windpipe, cough, andpletion."
"And therefore, it is necessary that bloodletting from the right arm be done carefully, because if it is too deep it generates weakness in the body and stomach."
"And bloodletting from the left arm causes accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, fever, and toothache. And it is done at the location of phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
"And you must command the bloodletter not to press his hand on the scarification lest he should wound the artery and cause a flow of blood."
"And bloodletting from the left cheek causes coldness in the mouth, gum disease, and signs of diseases that occur in the mouth. And it is done at the location of phlebotomy of the arteria helicalis which are on both lips."
"But bloodletting that is done above the two breasts causes catarrh, which occurs due topletion of heat."
"And bloodletting from the two divisions of the thighs causes benefit from phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica, black and cephalic veins. Because it attracts blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, as well as the small veins of other larger veins, so that the attraction can reach to the three veins."
"And command the bloodletter not to proceed with scarification, because the location is devoid of flesh and has nerves and arteries nearby."
"And it is a bloodletting done on the hip, which causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers nearby."
"And you must command the bloodletter to make a large bloodletting using a lancet because the location requires a strong section. And that the veins should be strongly pulled and then scarified with scarification."
"But bloodletting from the camber minusso reduces gradually through minute increments. Because it attracts blood from the entire body and causes ancient pains of the lungs, uterus, and bladder. And it provokes menstruation, and causes bothersome diseases. And it is done at the location of phlebotomy of two sophena veins, alahorcoben vein, and two cavernous veins."
"However, they debilitate the entire body and cause fainting in many people."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the left armpit is similar to that of bloodletting from both arms."
"The quality of the position of bloodletting is that at the beginning it should be shallow and then proceed gradually by suction. And do not prolong the duration of bloodletting, but rather pause it lightly and remove it gently so that the humors come to the location by gentle arrival." "And do not cease to repeat this until you see the location becoming reddened and swollen, and that the color of blood appears."
"Then scarify again and repeat suction little by little, and pay attention to the condition of the patient's body."
"Because that person who has tender skin with many pores, you must scarify him once and not more, lest the location become ulcerated."
"And command the bloodletter to widen the scarification a little and then proceed with gentle suction."
"And if the blood is thickened, then you must scarify twice because in the first scarification the path of subtle attraction to the blood and humidity of it becomes open." "But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired through examination."
"And if the blood is very dark-colored, then a third scarification should be made to complete it."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a small amount, one scarification is sufficient."
"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should make the scarification large. And if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify by a deep scarification."
"The term 'scarification' refers to the depth of the cut as far as the skin only."
"And if the skin of someone is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, then the locations for bloodletting should be anointed with gentle, softening, resolving oils; if it is in summer time, such as oil of aloe or violet oil, or doughnut oil, or celery seed oil. And if it is in wintertime, then use narcissus oil or lily oil or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and so on."
"If excessive humor is thick and cold, then oil of marjoram, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of aneth should be applied."
"If the patient is of tender flesh and wide pores, then oil should be prohibited, and the places around the wound should be washed with hot water or warm water infused with salt, or with decoction of wormwood, or with decoction of borrage, or similar remedies."
"And for one whose blood is excessively moist, wash their wounds with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar remedies."
"And for one whose humors are thick, wash their wounds with old wine, or water of hyssop (majoram), or decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar remedies."
"And the wound should be covered before bathing. It is necessary to apply it near the bath for one or two hours after bathing, and to sleep near the wound."
"What needs to happen in order to regulate the bleeding from a vein that has been opened before cauterization?"
"Consider this at the outset: If the patient or one to be bled is choleric and full of hot and inflamed blood, then one should take causes for cooling, such as sour grapes, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and their like."
"And pauses from their foods such as chickens, birds' flesh, roasted meats, and dishes seasoned with spices, and similar things."
"And for one whose temperament is phlegmatic, it is necessary to give them to drink syrup of almonds or syrup of hyssop with fennel seeds and sumac, and odoriferous wine between old and new; and that they be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as chickens, canary birds, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons."
"And on the day of venesection or phlebotomy, let drinking be greater than eating."
"And let some men be given to drink tyriaca alpharac, or musk medicines, such as muscata, or alcelita before venesection or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; and let them not take that medicine afterward."
"But let those venesections that are not made for scarring be made in such a way as to pause from the liver, and on the spleen and podagra (gout), and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the armpits of the arms, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
"And they are not sought except for attraction of blood from the member, thus as venesection pause on the breast in illness of flow of blood from the nose; and they use that for the dissolution of viscous phlegm from the member, thus as pausing on the belly and the navel; because it rarifies the member and scatters it and removes pain by resolving phlegm."
"And already venesection is made on the temples when they happen in their apoplexy or palsy, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the phlegm and expels the wind from its location."
"And similarly it does when venesection is made on the liver and spleen for resolving phlegm in those enclosed."
"And these venesections are administered solely with suction, and sometimes they are administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered full of water from the Tiber in illnesses of the spleen."
"This is so that the venesection may be full and larger, so it is water boiled alone or water in which herbs are cooked for this purpose."
"Form of venesection administered with fire: let the width of the opening be two finger-breadths according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of pitch be the most of a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the location that is in the circuit, the most of it, and let the wick be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle."
"Let it be made of wormwood or citron, of large margins, lion's tooth, purslane, and hyssop, for that they do not harm the member by their position over it."
"And let it be in the middle of it a transverse wick of wormwood or iron, where the candle is paused with fire."
"And already this venesection is much greater than that which we have recommended; and the little one is less according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it."
"And the venesections of the old and weakened are different from those of the young and robust ones."
"And the quality of pausing this venesection with fire on the member is that it extends the wick with fire of decent wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses that on the middle of the transverse wick in the middle location of the venesection, for that the fire may be kindled around the parting of the veins so that not the body of the sick person may be burned."
"And approach should be paused on the member of the sick person, and let it be over the wick that we have said, until when we have the venesections and do not need to hold the candle and that smoke rises above that wick, then the venesection will soon be dissolved."
"And approach the wick according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
"More in venesection that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse wick nor wick, and it is not administered unless it be filled with water, and it is paused only on the member."
"And this is its form: And this venesection, the greater it is, the better, for that it can receive a great quantity of water."
"Chapter XCVI."
"Bloodletting is not administered in most members but in those where it is impossible to place venesections due to their smallness, such as the eye and gum and similar ones; or in member devoid of flesh, such as the toe and nose and their like."
"And the quality of using those bloodsuckers that are found in muddy waters is if they are washed clean."
"And approach they should be laid day and night in muddy water until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and approach let the body be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and venesections; and approach rub the member of the sick person until it reddens; and approach they should be paused on it."
"And when they are full and satiated."
"And if it is possible to suck from the location with venesection, it is more preferable in treatment."
"But if not, then wash the location with sour wine and approach with much water; and let it be rubbed and expressed."
"And if the body of blood is prolonged near the skin of the bloodsuckers and it is hot, then take a cloth of linen in warm water and pause that over until the heat is absorbed."
"And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it three-times cooked vitriol, or walnuts and similar ones of the causes astringent, until the blood be arrested; or let the most of roasted chickpeas be paused on the location, and let them be laid until the chickpeas adhere to the location, and the blood is arrested."
"And if necessary, iteration of bloodsuckers, when it is possible to change those."
"And if bloodsuckers are prohibited from suspension, then let the location be rubbed with fresh blood or put a needle in the locations until blood comes out; and approach they should be paused, for those when they feel some blood soon adhere."
"And when you want them to let go, sprinkle over those a little of thrice-cooked garlic, or salt, or ashes, and they will soon let go."
"So begins the prologue of the third part: of restoration." "This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones."
"Oh, son, know that they boast of this chapter the foolish physicians and the common ones and those who at any time do not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of theirs."
"And for this reason it happens that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and I am not he who has forgotten at any time be all; and have not added what follows, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of theirs, until extracted the science from them."
"And now I turn to experimentation and study throughout my life."
"And now I have already described in this chapter everything that pertains to my knowledge and on which experiments have been conducted; for the sake of brevity, I have shortened it for you and relieved you from lengthiness; and shortened it even further by abbreviation; and shown it plainly enough in declaration; and formed many forms of instruments administered therein, as is done by addition in declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters."
"Chapter one."
"Summary and collections from the consideration of fractures of bones, from which a preliminary explanation is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken and diverse if any." "Therefore I will say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of speech, and chapters at the understanding of which at the beginning the artisans are forced to stand still and deliberate about the truth of those; so it is you and those who are eager that know or learn this noble art other than you."
"And then I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or compression occurs, immediately you should take flebotomy on the patient or let him bleed, or whatever ensemble, if there is no prohibition of any cause, such as debility of strength, or if it is a child to whom it has happened, or an old person, or during a time of great heat, or cold."
"And it is appropriate that he should be content with his diet of fresh herbs and of the flesh of birds and crabs; and let him avoid heavy meats and filling foods, and every food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of an abscess cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member."
"And then return the patient to his usual first regimen, with which he is accustomed to live."
"And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient should be nourished with nutritious foods of thick and heavy nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as pastries made from wheat cooked with water, rice, milk, chicken, beef, fresh cheese, thick wine and similar ones, and with this regimen coagulation of fracture occurs more easily and better."
"And know that the bones of the elderly when they are in men who are in the first decline and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of the members of theirs."
"But nevertheless nature is ordered and adapted over the broken bone of any part with some cause such as glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is conglutinated and united together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, like fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that from its works."
"And for this reason it is necessary to pause the patient's foods, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said."
"And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves."
"And I come with remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separated from the others."
"Great diversity even within itself." "And the species of bone fracture are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture, other than that which occurs in stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the satagia and astellas and additional ones that proceed and do not proceed, such as is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with swelling and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture."
"And for each species there is an appropriate treatment in the restoration of it, which will come to remembrance later in its separate place."
"Many signs of bone fracture." "And for this reason a bone fracture is known: there is tortuosity of it, and prominence and palpation of it to the touch, and that when you compress it with your hand."
"And then when there is no apparent tortuosity in the place nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not here a fracture."
"It may happen that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, in which case you should not move it with your hand and compress all of it; rather pause over it with the medicines of which remembrance will be given at that appropriate moment for the place; and especially it should be stretched by subtle straitening."
"And know that the place where it is arched and not split in two or other than that which happens in the satagia, when all the part of its comparison has been removed, then you should begin from your hour to rectify it having cauterization done upon it."
"And if cauterization is applied to it, then leave it for a few days until the cautery has ceased; and meanwhile treat it according to each manner that you can of elevation and application."
"And know that the restoration and treatment of it is easier than for the bone in which satagie has happened."
"And especially strengthen it according to what will come to remembrance later."
"But if there are satagia in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand."
"And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you should strive to return those additions with treatment and according to each manner that you can in their places."
"And guard yourself according to your skill that no harm comes upon the patient by your operation of them nor injury; and strive to apply one bone to its companion with the best forms you can."
"And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand and if here there is any different cause, then correct it and treat it according to the quantity of your virtue."
"And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause cautery to be applied because of their operation, or cause contraction in the member as we have seen from the operation of many."
The quality of the restriction in the broken limb is that which I recommend; so you should know that broken limbs are differentiated by their smallness and greatness and by their shape.
And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and foot, then it is necessary that their dressing should be of very fine linen.
But those that are large like the thigh or the leg, there should be a wrapping of linen and hard material; for this tight binding connects the large member and greatly strengthens it from all sides with restriction, ensuring that nothing enters.
And so beginning, so your bandaging of the fracture should be done carefully with proper binding applied there, over the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the limb deserves; and tighten it well with your hand using the linen.
And then take the remaining part above the place of the fracture and tighten it even more than before with your binding to ensure that there is not too much restriction at the site of the fracture. And then extend yourself with wrapping around the place of the fracture somewhat, and slowly loosen the binding little by little until you take one large part from it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around that other time over the place of the fracture with wrapping, and then go with the wrappings below the fracture; and let your operation be in tightening the wrapping and loosening it according to what has been said about the first wrapping above.
And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth with which to wrap around the tortuosity of the fracture if there is any tortuosity there; and if not, do not pause in it for any cause.
And then place another bandage over it, and then wrap around these wrappings gently and evenly at once if there is no inflammation or pus there, and afterwards pause over that which sits on the pus or inflammation; and leave it for a few days; and then tighten over it with stitches.
And let the stitches be of mature cane, carefully made; or of oak wood; or of branches of palm tree; and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and figure:
But it is necessary that the stitch which is placed over that fracture be thicker and wider than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to what is measured on the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then tighten over the stitches with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then lay over it with linen gently as has been said about tightening, and let your tightening be according to the place of the fracture more, and the further away from the fracture, the less the tightening.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people doing when placing their threads of twisted cords, it is a great error, for when the tightening is too much, equality will not be obtained.
And also very fine threads are not convenient because with them you will not be able to tighten as much as you want, and there should not be less than one finger's breadth between stitch and stitch.
And if the illness is said to be caused by the ends of the stitches near the tightening in the raw places, then pause those with a piece of linen or woolen cloth between them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes fracture occurs with plague, and disruption happens in the tendon, and I have written about that one in the chapter according to its particularity.
And know that not all broken limbs should be tightened with stitches on the first day; for which reason is that when a limb is large, it does not require tightening with stitches until after 2 or 3 or more days, according to your certainty of the arrival of pus.
And this is the manner of the bandages with which the Ancients restored fractures and dislocations and twists.
"Method of plastering as a remedy for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complex cases and particularly for women and children, because it does not cause heat nor friction: take some flour powder, specifically the bran left after removing it from the walls of the mill."
"And if you find this too thick and coarse, sieve it through a clean cloth, then use the finer flour for your dough."
"Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations and wry necks: take assafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and majoram, which is the root of wild celery, of each one dram; myrrh and aloe of each five drams; alochil of twenty drams. All these should be finely ground and sifted, then mixed with white of egg or flour paste if the patient's skin is scorched. This plaster has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, suitable for many people."
"Another method of plaster for the treatment of fractures and wry necks: take majoram, white lead, myrrh, aloe, acacia and gum arabic in equal amounts, each one dram."
"All of these are finely ground in a mortar with a wooden pestle and sifted, then mixed with water or flour paste and administered."
"A method of plaster for joints and separated bones in their places, which causes pain accidentally in those areas and also for fissures and fractures: take wool without grease, immerse it in vinegar, olive oil and honey, then place it on the affected area."
"Note that this plaster does not have virtue for restoration but serves to draw out pus, cauterize and expel pains properly."
"Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves, both together make a plaster of them."
"A brief method of plaster administration for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining pus: take white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, bran and flour, all together one part each; all are finely ground and mixed with wine if the member is not scorched."
"But if it is scorched, then use that with water of fresh coriander or simply water and flour paste."
"Another method of plaster which is very strong in resolving [pus], better than the first one, when a hard boil occurs during the restoration of the member: take white lead and its seed, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, flour and bran all together one part each; all are finely ground and mixed with water of soapwort or sweet water or wine, depending on the quality of the member and the relaxation of its color."
"But Hippocrates in his book does not specify that it should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, but rather cerote made from wax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommends that it should have a consistency between thickness and subtlety."
"But it is seen in Galen that they should be placed on the broken member during its restoration and the causes of dryness with little heat are such as myrrh, incense and similar things to those causes that we have recommended."
"A method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: take gum, wax, human hair cuttings or feathers, white lead, salt all together one part each; finely ground and sifted, mix it to make a plaster."
"But the quantity according to how much the plaster should remain on it and appropriately be removed is this: if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not broken, then you do not remove it for many days." "And if severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the place, then you remove it immediately or in that hour, and replace the plaster on it."
"And take a cloth of it and a damp sea sponge, and immerse that in hot water, and with that wash the affected area inside until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the member rest for an hour. Then place on it lanolin immersed in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and leave it on overnight until you are sure of a cauterized boil, and that the inflammation of the member has abated and the pain of it has been removed."
"And then reapply that subtle bandage and plaster gently and do not tighten too much with your first constraint, and subtly with it until it is healed."
"And if at times the boil and the heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are already removed from everything, and you need plaster and bandaging, then apply them again in the same way as you did at the beginning."
"And if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs to the member, then do not remove it but let it remain for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you see it in the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on it."
"And then adjust the bandage more than your first one completely, and adjust it to the thickness of the food of the sick person, according to how much is preceded by its restoration."
"But if you see that the place of the fracture is already dry and shriveled more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore immerse it in hot water every time you remove it; do this for all three days. And loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation blood reaches the member, and it heals easily."
"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do at another time when it is not restored as it should be and is restored crookedly, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were straightener then it would have increased the ancients in their books and guarded against this."
"And I have not seen any of them do that, therefore it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
"Chapter II: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
"Fractures have various shapes and causes. Some are caused by blows that break all the bone into its cavity, like a broken stick, and these are called 'ascial'. Others are caused when a blow cuts part of the bone without reaching the marrow, and these are called 'levatio absolute'."
"The plague of these two fractures is either great or small. The fracture that is crushed or bruised results from a blow with force or fall on stone."
"This fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum of the bone or is located on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures can be great or small."
"And there is a fracture that occurs within the bone itself, in its finest detail, like a hair's width; this type of fracture is called 'capillary fracture'."
"And there is also fracture that occurs due to falls or blows from stone or similar objects, which causes fragments of bone to be driven into the interior of the bone itself, particularly in concave areas like those found at the elbow joint when it suffers a blow and becomes fractured."
"And this happens more often in the bones of damp places, as is seen in the heads of infants."
"Therefore, all these species of fractures are painful like stars separated by intervals." "And I have come to remember all this in its proper place."
"I know all these species of fractures through detection on those bones and inquiry by touching and observing the rotten flesh that is on them."
"A capillary fracture is recognized because when it is exposed on the bone and cleaned, it appears black to the touch."
"But in the treatment of fractures, one should first consider the accompanying conditions of the illness. If the patient has symptoms such as vomiting from cholera, syncope, loss of consciousness, fever, pallor and redness of the eyes, and similar symptoms to those found in serious conditions, it is not advisable to attempt a cure."
"However, if the patient does not have any accompanying symptoms, then you may begin treating the fracture."
"The reason for this is that if the fracture has already begun to set before you have attended to it, particularly during the cold days of winter, then you should study the bone tissue in detail on the fourteenth day according to all its dispositions."
"But if it is during the summer days, then you should expose the bone on the seventh day, ensuring that what remains of the bone tissue has become corrupted by the surrounding flesh, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur."
"If the fracture has already reached the skin covering the brain and is in many small fragments and adherent, then you should incise the comminuted and adherent fragment, following my instructions."
"Therefore, you should carefully shave the patient's head and uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as best you can, following the appearance of the fracture, so that it is light upon the patient."
"If it happens that you must make a detection of the bone, with blood flowing or a hot abscess, then you should postpone the operation until what is necessary has been done. And this is how: you should dress the wound with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and allow the fracture to rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure that there is no longer any bleeding. Then begin with the circumcision of the bone and the ablation of it."
"This is according to one of two operative methods."
"The first method is that you should incise the bone with a straight incision, using an instrument such as this: ... And then use another instrument of similar shape but slightly wider..."
"Then use an even wider instrument."
"You should have a variety of instruments available to you, some wider than others, and some shorter than others. They should be sharp at their tips and made of iron or bronze."
"Use them with ease in percussion on the incision to avoid striking the head or causing pain to the patient."
"If the bone is strong and hard, then you should first make a hole around it before inserting the instruments with their shallow blades."
"These are not called 'non-depth' blades but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone head and thus cannot be submerged or pass through the thickness of the bone."
"It is advisable that you take many of these blades with you, each suited to the thickness of each bone, so that in all cases where the bone head is present, its sharp end should be equal in length and breadth according to the thickness of the bone."
"This is the shape of three types of trepan: The purpose of using a trepan to drill around the broken bone is that you should place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then move the trepan to another location, keeping an interval between each stroke equal to the thickness of the ray or thereabouts."
"Then incise with instruments between each stroke of the bone, making it as subtle as possible at the end, as we have said. Do this until you remove the bone, either with your hand or for some other cause using tools such as tweezers and fine forceps which you will have prepared for that purpose."
"It is necessary that you take great care that the incision does not touch any cause of the brain."
"Then when you have completed the perforation of the bone and separated it from the brain if it was attached to it, you should extract it. It is necessary that you rasp and scrape it with an instrument similar to a scalpel but finer and sharper than the others."
"If any small bone fragments remain and are scattered about, then remove them easily with whatever instrument is appropriate. Then dress the wound with linens and dressings as we have mentioned."
"The other method of operation is easy and far from fearsome, which Gaudentius praised highly for his great skill; this is the speech about it: In the beginning, you must begin by uncovering the bone fragment in the place where the fracture is most violent and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fragment and placed beside it the pointed end of this gentle and cheerful scalpel, which has this shape:"
"And the lenticular part is for guiding and not for cutting any tissue, while the pointed end is on both sides in length, as you see. The lenticular part should be adjusted to the brain with the sharp face incident upon the bone."
"Then strike the scalpel with a small hammer so that you cut all of the bone easily as it rotates. Be sure that no panic arises in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant, certainly he would be asleep."
"Then if any attached tissue remains on the bone of the panicle in some places, cut that with the lenticular end of the scalpel and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm or fear."
If bone fracture does not penetrate into the soft tissue, and that which is cut off or removed from the bone is its outer surface, leaving behind roughness and subtle spurs, then it becomes necessary to remove this roughness with delicate razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that they may be administered at all suitable locations with the greatest precision according to how you perceive your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
You must administer your razor with which you began removing the bone using the broadest aspect of its blade and gradually proceed to use its finest edge, ensuring that you continue this process throughout until you have removed all roughness from every part of it.
Also in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to how you perceive their rectification.
But it is necessary that they are not confused by all those who have studied this art. "And based on what we have written, we have shown this in cases of large fractures."
"And if the panniculus is retained when you excise the bone, then you should take linen according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; and also take another piece of linen folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first one gently so as not to press too hard on the flesh; and then apply latement, but do not stretch it except according to the size of the wound alone."
"And leave it like this for one or two days until you are sure that the wound is healing; and then remove the dressing and apply medications that promote dryness, such as lint seeds and iris flour, powdered frankincense and aloe, and similar substances."
"And if you make these medications into powders that are finely powdered and applied dry to the wound, and generally speaking, apply only those medications whose property is to cleanse without biting."
"And guard yourself according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean and not obscured by grease or other impurities; do not allow moisture to accumulate there, for when it settles on the membrane of the brain it corrupts it and causes harmful illness."
"And if it happens in the membrane of the head, especially when the bone has been removed and the wound is being treated, and there appears blackness on its surface; then consider whether any of the symptoms that we have mentioned occur, so that you may know that it is a serious case without doubt."
"But if the blackness appears only because of the medication that has been applied to it, and that medication is the cause of that blackness, then you should take some honey and three parts rose oil, and with those saturate a linen cloth, and gently place it on the membrane; and then treat it according to the usual methods until it heals."
"And if it happens in the membrane of the head, especially when the bone has been removed and the wound is being treated, and there appears blackness on its surface; then consider whether any of the symptoms that we have mentioned occur, so that you may know that it is a serious case without doubt."
"On restoring the nose when it is cut."
"You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces simultaneously rising up, nor is one of those parts ever seen cut off, because it has two bones, and the cartilaginous part is not broken, and nothing happens to it except rubbing, twisting, and bending."
"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert the little finger into its place, and gently press that fracture inward with your little finger from within and your thumb from without until the nose returns to its natural shape." "And let this be done by you easily, and take care not to cause harm to the patient through your operation."
"And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your little finger cannot reach it, then use the extremity of a reed that has been made somewhat thicker."
"And if both parts are broken, then you should make them similar to each other."
"And strive for the restoration of it on the first day after the fracture if possible; and if not, then on the seventh or tenth day you should apply cautery to the swelling."
"And insert into the extremity of the nose a wick made of linen if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces of cotton if it is in both parts, and make them thick enough to fill up the passage of the nose."
"But some of the ancient restorers say that the cotton should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but this is not seen by me. It should rather be dipped in album of egg yolk mixed with powder of mallow; and let the wick remain there until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened."
"And sometimes a feather made of lion's skin is inserted into the nose in place of cotton, especially if there has been severe fracture of the nose and the patient cannot breathe through it."
"And this cause is not necessary for you. And if you wish, do that, and if you wish, use cotton."
"And if another swelling occurs after cautery, plaster the nose with wax or cerote mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with diaclycon."
"But if there is no swelling after cautery, then you should plaster it outside with flour of sesame and powder of iris roots mixed with albumen of egg; and gently apply a lion's skin over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason."
"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed together, then you should cut over them and extract them using instruments that are appropriate for them; and then suture the incision and treat it with something that encourages healing and consolidation, and with plasters that are suitable."
"And if a ulcer appears inside the nose, then you should treat it with cotton and administer leaden tubes until it is completely healed."
"Chapter iv."
"On restoring the jawbone when it is broken."
"When the left jawbone is broken and the fracture does not have an ulcer, first examine whether the fracture is outside only, and not divided into two parts and curved inward at its ends. If it is so, then its diagnosis will be easy."
"And then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger. And push gently with that finger the swelling of the fracture inside at its ends outside, using your other hand to press the outside part of the bone in a similar way."
"And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply traction to both parts according to a straight line until it is possible to reduce the fracture."
"And if some teeth are loose due to dislocation, then strengthen those which you expect will remain with gold or silver wire or silk thread. And then plaster the broken jawbone with cerote, and apply a folded cloth on top of it, and apply a large round piece of felt well made, or a sole of leather stretched out along the length of the jawbone. And finally bind it gently from above according to how you have prepared the bandage and what is appropriate for its application, taking care not to destroy it."
"And instruct the patient to rest quietly and avoid drinking hot liquids."
"And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some way, then on the third day try to remove it and correct what has been altered from it. And plaster it with powder of mallow, albumen of egg, or flour of sesame after removing the cerote, and apply a lion's wool cloth over the plaster."
"And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it there until it is healed and strengthened. For many times this fracture heals in three weeks."
"And if another time an ulcer forms after the cautery, then apply what has been said many times in this book for its healing, and remove that ulcer."
"And if the fracture is complicated by plague, then consider whether it is due to separation or suppuration. If it is due to suppuration, then be careful to remove that suppuration with whatever is appropriate for its removal among the instruments."
If the opening of the plague wound is narrow, then widen it using forceps according to your need.
And when you have finished those procedures, and nothing remains to be done, then if the opening of the plague wound is wide, but if not, place over it one of the plasters that are suitable for this purpose and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter five
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Frequently, the collarbone breaks at its midpoint in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
When it breaks, either it is separated, or it is separated into two parts without any displacement of the fragments; this type of fracture is easy to restore. Or else, it is such that displacement has occurred in it, and restoration of it is difficult. Or else, it is such that the fracture is accompanied by a plague wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is not accompanied by a plague wound, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one may hold theadjuster and follow the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck on either side of the fracture.
Then carefully approximate the fragments with your fingers within such time that the desired form is achieved without any prominence or concavity at the site of the fracture.
And if more extension is needed, then place a pad of linen or wool on the side of the wound, its size according to your need. Then extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand until you have approximated the fracture as desired.
And if you are unable to draw the end of the collarbone out beyond its fragments, then have the patient sit up on his haunches and place a bolster made of thick cloth under him.
And the assistant presses on the muscles of either side of the fragments until the bone of the collarbone is elevated above its position in front. Then you shall reduce and approximate the fracture with your fingers as described above.
But if you feel that there are displacements of the collarbone and they are mobile, then incise over it and remove those fragments with ease.
And if the fragment is retained in the bone, then make an incision on it with one of the incissors that you have prepared for this purpose. This instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following shape:
And it resembles a spoon with this concavity. Its width should be according to your need, depending on the size of the bone or the prominence of the fragment.
But its length should be as great as possible for the operation; it should have two extremities like this, one being broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you made when you removed the fragment from the bone is large and you fear an abscess will form, then approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess will form, then fill the wound with linen and powder according to the size of the wound.
And if an abscess forms, then take some linen dipped in sour wine and rose oil mixed with wine, and apply it over that area.
And all of this is done so that the splint does not move over the broken bone. And you should check the dressing every day to see if the bandage has softened or if the splint has shifted, and if it has, then correct it and tighten the binding.
And then place the dressing over the bone and on both sides of it under the armpit at night so that with this elevation the assistant raises up the arm on that side, thereby elevating the fracture of the collarbone above its muscles. Or else you may bind the arm to the chest with a sling.
And do not remove the dressing until about twelve days have passed without any signs of infection or abscess having occurred in that place.
And also renew the poultice if you see that its effect is diminished, and adjust it to fit the compression and restore it until it has been restored and the fracture of the collarbone has healed.
And in about twenty-eight days it becomes strong and comfortable. But sometimes in some people this takes less time than that.
Chapter VI
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder
The blade of the scapula is broken on its lateral side, and only its margins are broken.
And so when the blade of the scapula is broken and it is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare for its reduction and reduce it in every way that you can by ingenuity.
And then place powdered flour with egg white and linen on it, and also place a folded cloth poultice. Then also place over that a thin board splint according to the size of the entire blade or slightly larger.
But if on one side of the splint there is a concavity in some places on the blade, then fill that concavity with linen and also make the splint even.
And then bind it firmly above with a long bandage having downward compression and with firmness of the splint so that it does not shift from its place.
Check the dressing every day. And whenever it becomes softened, change it and tighten it again and adjust the splint if it has shifted from its place.
Keep the limb on its own side.
The blade of the scapula is restored in twenty days or at most twenty-five.
And so when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the dressing, and be sure that it is of those bones whose union is not delayed nor their healing slowed.
And if you proceed from the site of the broken bone and place your hand on the shoulder blade, then incise there and drain it if necessary, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the collarbone for treating an abscess if one should occur here.
De restauracio de fractura de la clavicula.
"To treat a broken leg."
"The leg is sometimes fractured in the middle of it and this can happen even if the ends are only cracked or shattered."
"And when the middle of it is broken in accidents, it leans towards one side and causes pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood. The fracture can be felt in the cavity of the bone and is not hidden to the touch."
"And in the treatment of it, the patient should be placed on their back and a cushion put between their thighs; then press gently upon the muscles of the leg and adjust the bones of the leg as well as possible, according to all methods that are appropriate and convenient, until the shape of the bone is restored."
"And then apply bandages and gauze or linen cloths soaked in saltwater or chalk water and similar things, carefully wrapping them around the broken bone so that it is not moved. And sometimes tie a splint on the back to maintain its roundness, and tighten this with proper binding. And observe the dressing at all times, tightening it when it becomes loose."
"And if it is necessary to remove the dressing due to corruption or pressure, pain, swelling, or an abscess occurring in that place, then gently remove and replace the dressing, and correct whatever has happened there with care using proper methods. And then reapply the splint, sometimes changing its position; and adjust the bindings until healing occurs."
**Chapter VIII.**
"For the healing of the ribs when they are crushed."
"Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in large spaces where there is flesh on the back; and at their ends, near the cartilage, it rarely happens except for that reason." "And its recognition is not hidden from feeling through inquiry with them."
"And the healing should be done as follows: align the fracture with the said servant according to the most possible manner, so that it may be healed according to what is necessary, and properly apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary."
"And if the fracture of the ribs is declinant towards its ends within, then it often happens that there is sudden sharp pain and puncture, such as occurs in those who have suffered pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. And it also happens with difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting much blood; and this is difficult to cure."
"And already the Ancients knew how to treat that with many remedies."
"Thus they say: Cover the patient with warm foods that generate heat and windiness, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture pushed outward."
"However, we should avoid this because it could cause an easy boil to form, unless otherwise necessary. And if one were to occur, this would help alleviate it."
"They said some of them that it should be placed on windiness and open so that it may suck strongly; and this seems like reasoning, but however it is feared that the windiness may draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness."
"Some of them said: Cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wrapping may fit well according to its roundness; and let the illness be treated with pleurisy cure of food and medicine."
"And if the illness causes violent constriction which is not endured, and the bone pierces the velament with a puncturing wound, then they fear about the illness. Therefore, one should cut over the place, uncover the broken rib, and immediately place upon it that instrument which preserves the ciaphac, the memory of which has been previously mentioned, and gently cut the bone and extract it."
"And also, if the wound is large, sew its two lips with stitches, and dress it with plasters until it heals."
"And if an abscess forms inside, then take some powder and mix it with rose oil and apply it to the place, and let the illness be treated with what is appropriate for the internal abscess."
"And he should be propped up on pillows so that he may sit while sleeping until he is healed."
"Chapter Nine."
"Regarding the restoration of fractures of the spinal column in the back and neck."
Sometimes it happens that fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens to their articulation, similarly with the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then examine whether sometimes his muscles are softened, stunned, and deadened so that they can neither move nor extend nor contract. And when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he does not feel any pain there, then you know that it has not healed. In such cases it is mortal.
But if he can move those muscles and feels constriction with pressure or puncture there, then you know that the bone is saved and the illness will go away with treatment.
But if it seems that the vertebrae of the neck are similar to this case and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider their position.
Then if you find that some of them are already softened, it happened as in this case. And especially when he lies on his back, he feels ventilation and expulsion without his will, and sometimes he is raised up on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you know that it is mortal, and at that point do not bother with its treatment.
"But if none of those occurs, the cause is better and more lightweight."
"The treatment for it is that you apply sedation to the abscess that has formed over the inflamed and infected area with some cotton soaked in hot water; place it there several times a day until the abscess is sedated."
"And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and press it onto that area with a bandage. Command the patient to rest and remain calm, and not sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed."
"And if the inflammation of the bone sets in or some other cause that has already separated from it occurs, then you must cut into the flesh and remove that bone. Then join the two lips of the wound together with stitches if it is large; and then treat it with a poultice made from honey, until it heals."
"But if the head of the bone is broken off and it is the end of the cure, then you must insert your left thumb into the anus and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible by means of a traction device. Then apply a poultice or plaster and bandage it."
"And if you feel broken fragments within it, then you must open that up and remove them, and treat the wound with the appropriate cure until it is healed."
Chapter X
Of restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are sometimes broken and when they are, their fractures are only contusions at their extremities and they incline toward the inside. And it happens that the patient feels pain in that place and puncturing, and the foot becomes stiff when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you should stretch your hand over it until it is above the fracture as shown in the figure.
And if the fracture is only at its extremity, then you should grasp it according to what appears appropriate for traction until it is brought together in its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already inclines towards the inside of the foot, then you should have the patient lie on his/her stomach until you are prepared to perform the reduction of that fracture. And then when you have grasped it, apply a plaster and also apply splints of wood or bone, and bind them tightly without fear of puncturing the fracture or displacing the splints.
And then fill in the concave part with whatever is at hand so that it takes up the pressure equally and commands the patient to sleep on their back or side.
But if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should cease the extension and reduction of it until the inflammation has subsided, and apply whatever is appropriate to subdue that inflammation. And then return to the reduction of it and bind it as is necessary.
And if fragments or splinters occur in the bone, then you should remove them
Chapter XI
Of restoration of fracture of the clavicle
The clavicle is that which is between the chest and the head of the shoulder
And if it is broken, then its restoration is by one of two methods, the first of which is that you should take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this way:
And let there be attached at both ends two cords and then it shall be suspended from an elevated place
And then have the patient sit on a chair and then place their broken arm over the wood so that it reaches to its tip in the middle part where the curvature of the wood is attached
And then suspend some heavy weight from it, or have the patient extend it towards the left side and then the physician should hold both of its ends together so that the fracture returns to its proper position
The other method is that the patient should be propped up on their neck and have their collarbone suspended by a cord. And then command two assistants to hold it, one above the fracture with both hands and the other below it, and each of them should extend towards his side
And if you wish for the extension to be stronger, then bind it with one cord above the fracture and another below it, and each of the assistants should extend towards their respective sides
Therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then half of the cord should be placed on the tip and the other half below the fracture towards the chest
Similarly if the fracture is close to the chest, then the cord should be placed on that location and also on the chest
Grasp it gently and without struggle and then when it has been grasped as is necessary and applied properly, then bind it if inflammation does not occur
But if inflammation occurs, then leave the splint on for seven days and apply to it a compress of flaxseed boiled in vinegar and rose oil until the inflammation has subsided, and then bind it
And the method of binding it is that you should place plaster on the fracture and then place a wrapping of moist cloth over the plaster and then adjust the arm over that clavicle and place its covered hand on its own muscle
And then wrap the cloth around it and bind the arm over the clavicle so that the arm is in its proper position, unless some cause prevents it from doing so due to the broken bone
And then apply splints.
And then place on the fracture that splint which is broader and stronger than the others and insert between each splint the width of a finger and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on either side
And then bind over the splints with the splint which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter
And ensure that your binding over the fracture is as tight as possible And when the fracture has healed, then the binding should be looser
Therefore if you find yourself in the situation of having applied splints and binding as we have said at the time when you are restoring the limb to its proper position, then do so
And if you fear inflammation, then leave the binding and splints on for seven days as we have said
And then consider the cord in all parts for three days so that it does not cause pressure or inflammation there, or so that food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess tightness of the binding, and therefore correct everything as we have said
But if you suspect that nothing will happen due to your carelessness, then do not loosen the bandage but rather wait for three days or more
And let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
And place a bolster full of wool on the clavicle and ensure at all times during the night or day that neither the figure of the broken limb is disturbed nor that the cord becomes softened, so that you may correct everything with your skill
And provide food for the patient according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, so that the food is soft at first until binding begins and then gradually make it thicker.
As for the custom of the splints and bandages, they should be bound for forty days. Then they should be loosened and a bath given and medicinal ointments applied which can correct them
And if the fracture has been properly healed, then do not remove the binding and splints until after ten days or two months
"Chapter Twelve."
"On the restoration of a broken arm."
"The arm is composed of two bones called the two forks; one of which is small and is that which holds the aforementioned fist, while the other is large and is placed next to it on the side facing downwards."
"And sometimes only the larger fork bone breaks, or only the smaller one; but rarely do they break together."
"When the little fork bone breaks at the top, its restoration and healing will be easier."
"But when it breaks below the fracture, its restoration is difficult and its healing takes a long time."
"And even worse than that is when two bones break together."
"Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small fork above, then it is advisable for the doctor to perform a simple reduction with ease before it heals."
"But if the large fork is what has broken, then traction must be applied forcefully."
"And if both forks are broken together, then you should apply traction even harder."
"And you should place the figure of the hand in its proper position during reduction and traction by extending it on a pillow; placing the thumb above all other fingers, the little finger lower than the others, and the patient lying on their side facing upwards."
"And place a pillow in front of them at the level or behind the elbow to prevent him from moving around."
"Now have one assistant extend the elbow below with their own hand or with linen, and another assistant extend it above in the same manner."
"And now let the surgeon reduce the bone into place by aligning it according to its best possible position."
"If there are any irregularities in the fracture of the bone, then you should press all your weight on it to reduce it back into place."
"But if there is separation of the bone ends with displacement of the elbow joint that does not reduce spontaneously, then you should proceed as follows:..."
"But if the fracture is compounded (open), I have already discussed this case separately. Therefore, take care of that."
"And if you encounter an aposteme at the beginning of your reduction, then take a cloth smeared with cerot made from rose oil and white wax, which should be neither too thick nor too thin. Place this cloth over the aposteme with subtle tension until it subsides. Then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow mixed with egg whites, and also apply plaster strips; make sure that the plaster strip placed on the fracture is wide and strong."
"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm, there are usually six plaster strips applied, either for a fracture of one fork or for two forks together."
"Now apply your traction even harder and more vehemently over the fracture site, and if necessary, increase the tension even further on the proximal or distal parts of the fracture according to what is described at the beginning of this chapter."
"And the cloths wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moistened with water, not hard or rough. The bandage used for tension should be of moderate thickness between subtle and thick, as recommended earlier."
"Keep the limb immobilized for several days." "And if there is any cause that requires repositioning, such as swelling of the limb, then you should immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides."
"Leave the limb at rest without traction for a few days and then reapply the traction."
"And if the traction has been sufficiently maintained and the bone has already reduced well, then you should now finish everything with your own strength."
"And if there is any obstruction of nourishment to the limb due to excessive traction, then you should relax it a little and leave it alone for a few days until circulation is restored, and then apply traction again."
"But if the limb shows no signs of any of the conditions mentioned earlier, then there is no need to remove the traction for more than about 20 days or so."
"Then have the patient use his own strength to move his arm around and make him lie on his back to sleep."
"And know that this fracture is usually restored in 30 to 32 days, but sometimes it can be restored in as few as 28 days, depending on the condition of the complexion and the strength of the patient."
"Chapter XIII."
"On the reduction of fractures of the thumb and fingers."
"Know that at the tip of the hand and in the joints of the fingers there are often fractures, not actual breaks but frequent dislocations."
"And when there is fracture or dislocation of the hand, the patient should be made to lie on their back with their arms extended out in front of them, and place their other hand over that one to keep it steady."
"Then the servant should extend the broken bones and the physician will align them, making sure they fit together well with proper alignment."
"And then a plaster and bandage should be applied, unless there is already a wound that needs cauterizing. Afterwards, apply a splint according to the size of the location, and you have already wrapped it in linen."
"But if the fracture is on the palm side of the hand, then make a sling from cloth and tell the patient to hold it with their palm pressed against theirs. Afterwards, bind it securely with a long piece of cloth."
"And the splint should be made of leather wrapped in cloth that is elevated on one side so that the leather touches the palm. Then bind it securely as needed."
"But if the fracture is on the outer side of the hand, then apply a splint on top and another splint from the edge of the palm to the wrist so that the hand is upright and straight. Then apply the bandage in this way, as if the hand were turned towards the little finger between those parts."
"And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of those parts, then if it's the thumb, align it as needed and bind it to the palm. And if you wish, apply a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in one of the other knuckles, such as at the middle joint or the index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then align and bind it with the finger on which it occurs. Or they can all be bound together continuously, which is better; or apply a small splint over that area, as we have said for the thumb."
"And when you are performing your restoration and bandaging, consider the location of the wound, cauterization, and opposition according to what is needed in case any cause occurs that has been mentioned previously."
"Chapter XIV."
"On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the ankle."
"The bone of the ankle is often broken and declares itself by becoming displaced at the joint in front and being pushed upwards."
"And the restoration is done in such a way that a bandage is applied above the fracture and another below it. The patient should be lying on their stomach with their face down."
"And the minister should extend all the bandages to his party according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
"If the fracture is at the root of the thigh bone, then draw the thread tightly to its edge near the knee joint, so that the tension comes out from there, and let another thread remain on the break."
"If the fracture is at the knee joint, then draw the thread tightly to the knee, and let the tension come out from there."
"And then the doctor presses both bones together at the two ends so that they reduce it back to its natural shape and the bone is joined together by good union. Then you must apply a plaster and strapping if there is no inflammation of the member." "But if there is an abscess, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess has softened, and then return to your treatment."
"The strapping should be done like this: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture two or three times and remove any excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the ankle and root of the thigh."
"And insert a long needle between the thigh and the bandage near the knee joint, bringing the ends of the thread from above on both sides, then wrap it around the limb."
"And then press a pad over the thigh at that fracture point, and attach a splint to the outer surface of the bandage."
"And then fill in the spaces between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths so that the strapping remains firm."
"And then begin with a tight strapping of the middle over the fracture point using three or four wraps, and as you move away from the fracture point, make your strapping looser and softer."
"And then extend both ends of the thread to the sides until they reach the heel of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splint on the other side so that the limb does not move from its position."
"And then leave the strapping on for several days without causing any injury to the limb or abscesses or inflammation or swelling resembling those described earlier. If anything happens, remove the strapping immediately and correct it as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times."
"But if the bone sticks out from its proper place, you must reduce it back into position as much as possible. If this cannot be done, then apply a splint and remove it once healing has occurred."
"And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints other than those that have been mentioned in the treatise and in the arm."
"But nevertheless, in restoring the limb in this manner there should be no limpiness caused by shortening. And if it is restored alone, without the other leg being applied, then necessarily that limb will remain lame."
"And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
"Chapter Fifteen"
"On the reduction of fractures of the collarbone."
"You should know that fracture of the kneecap can occur suddenly, but it often happens due to direct impact."
"And if there is fracture, it is only a split or crack in its parts, and this is an illness or small injury, and overall it has been felt as such."
"And the repair of it is easy, so that what has been broken in its parts should be united again with these sutures that have been added and joined together as much as possible for equanimity and ease of formation."
"And therefore pause with plaster and pausing over that round surface, if you need to do so; and stretch over it with this binding accordingly."
"And also consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, thus like cauterization and similar applications as much as possible so that it pauses on all accidents with whatever is convenient for its healing."
"Chapter XVI"
"On the repair of fracture of the knee-cap."
"You should know that in the kneecap there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called by the name of the kneecap; and the other is thin, and is called patella."
"And it happens with some species of fracture that it occurs to the two bones of the arm, and therefore its repair is made in the same way as the repair of the arm is made, and the operation for it is one."
"And if both bones are broken at once, the kneecap becomes completely fragmented."
"If it is broken, the bone becomes twisted at its ends."
"And if it is crushed but not displaced, then those are cases which are not serious."
"And especially apply extension, traction and splinting of the bones according to that method."
"But consider this, if the fracture of the thigh bone is not accompanied by many complications, then the extension should be lighter and gentler, according to your strength."
"And when operating on the thigh bone, after you have straightened the bones and completed your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a tree, which is placed near those causes that are placed in usual positions, and these are made equally from branches of palm; choose those that are light, not too heavy or large, and their length should be equal to the length of the thigh bone, from the knee to the hip."
"And then wrap each piece of wood in two layers according to its length, and place one on the upper thigh at one end and the other on the other end, and they should be placed from ten inches below the hip joint downwards."
"And then tie the two splints in three places at both extremities and at the middle point, because with this structure the thigh bone is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and it stands for good position."
"And now you will administer a splint of wood according to the length of the thigh bone, and place it on it so that it may preserve its position."
"And especially this should be done in fracture cases, and when such an injury occurs properly."
"And then examine the thigh bone every day and study it carefully to see if there is any inflammation or swelling or other similar causes. And whenever such cause occurs, you should apply that which is necessary according to the condition for its healing."
"Chapter XVII."
Of the fracture of the ankle bone and bones of the foot.
Not the ankle bone alone suffers fracture all the time; but some bones of the foot suffer fracture occasionally; and those of the foot seldom suffer fracture, and do not suffer it unless they are out of their usual position.
And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and those bones are sometimes elevated above one another among themselves, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared thus, as going.
And near upon this he places one foot upon that which is elevated by those bones; and near upon it presses them down and squeezes them round about in the places.
And near upon this he applies plaster and stops up above; and places on the front of the foot a small table with two flat heads.
And near upon this he stretches that limb downwards with the foot; because thou hast enveloped it with cloths and other things of which thou standest in need.
And when three or four days have passed thou shalt then unbind it; for thou wilt find the bones squeezed together, either broken or disjointed; and the operation on these is as follows.
But if some of them are broken, then restore these; and squeeze them together thus with glue and sew as thou hast been taught in the restoration of those of the hand. And near upon this place the splint along the length of the toe and let it be thus made somewhat wider at the end; and near upon this place on the foot that table which hath been recommended to thee, and stretch that with a downward strain.
But if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place over each toe a splint according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin; and stretch the table on the lower part of the foot and let it stand upon one of the flat heads at the front of the foot so that it may have good retention.
And it is necessary for thee that thou dost not forget to consider all those causes which are mentioned to thee in the other fractures of accidents that have been spoken of; and apply thyself to each accident with what is appropriate.
Chapter XVIII
Of the fracture of the thigh bone of a woman, of the bone of the hip joint and of the penis.
When the thigh bone of a woman is broken, then make that cease in this manner, and near upon this incline it somewhat at the joint of the two legs behind.
And near upon this the midwife shall bind it with soft cloth and let it be made firm in the thigh thus as an egg; and near upon this let the woman lie on her back and elevate little by little one buttock; for all this is done until that is before the joint of the thigh thus as an egg, and the broken bone returns.
And near upon this apply poultices to the buttock; and when she wishes to urinate remove the bandage with ease and let her urinate; and reduce it again and return it according to the manner in which thou hast first placed it on; and then return to the first poultice.
And do thus for seven days or thereabouts, for that is restored.
And if thou wilt, take once a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the breach of that one with a reed cane; and put all the bladder into the thigh bone and then blow into the reed with breath until the bladder be inflated within the thigh bone, for the fracture returns.
And near upon this let it be bound up with soft cloth and rest thus for some days according to that which hath been recommended until it be healed.
And when the bone of the hip joint of a man or woman is broken, then administer to the restoration and reduction of it that which hath been recommended in the bone of the hip.
And that which is right is not concealed in these fractures near to the body and easily done, especially to him to whom this my book is some study and use; for that fracture signifieth to thee in the greater dispositions a straight way rightly in the restoration and the strapping of it, and therefore thou shalt understand well.
But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take a goose feather and put the penis into that; and near upon this apply over it wrapping of cloth and let it be wrapped up, and then let it lie for three days or thereabouts, and it shall be healed.
Chapter XIX
"For the healing of bone fractures when they are inflamed."
"It is convenient for that person who has suffered a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large like those of the thigh or arm, or similar. Therefore, you should immediately flebotomize that person if conditions for bloodletting are suitable as mentioned above."
"If the inflammation flows with blood, then you should cover it immediately and powder it with this mixture:..."
"And thus begins to restore the fracture on that same day, without delay, unless there is an abscess."
"But if an abscess occurs, you should leave the restoration for 9 days until it has healed. And do not approach it on the third day or fourth day altogether, because bad accidents may occur."
"But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin and exposed, you should carefully reduce it and align it with your hands using gentle force without excessive tension."
"But if the reduction is not well prepared and equaling it with your hands alone causes excessive tension, then you should use this instrument to reduce it: it is made of iron, seven or eight digits long and its width according to the amount of inflammation. And so it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these instruments ready at hand for all kinds of fractures."
"And once it is reduced and properly aligned, apply a small amount of pressure so that it is not doubled during the operation."
"And if there are sharp edges at the ends of the bone fragments, you should carefully remove them with the forceps and reduce the size of the fragments as much as possible."
"And this is how it looks:"
"It is called in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', meaning it is a rare case."
"For what reason must the extremity of his foot be elevated above the prominence of the bone?"
"And press him in a way that makes the bone return to its original position, and keep it there with some pressure."
"And then try to align the extremities of the fracture between them. If the extremity of the broken bone is thin and does not fit well with the instrument, you should insert the extremity of that bone into the tool so that it has enough power."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended, then cut it using one of the instruments mentioned earlier, or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you."
"And also rasp that which remains on the bone from sharp edges and small chips."
"And when the bone has been reduced and during the reduction the patient feels intense pain on moving, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position. Therefore do this if you want to greatly benefit the patient."
"When you have completed your treatment of the bone, then immerse it in black soap and water, especially if it is summer, and do not pour any grease or oil over it for fear that putrefaction and corruption may occur."
"And also apply splints at the time of completion of the bone treatment and leave the wound exposed until you insert them with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the wound."
"And be very careful that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times fools have done this and caused harm to their patients with death or rotting flesh or other mischief. This is unhealthy." "And if your traction is light, soft, different from the usual traction used for fractures."
"And if the wound is large or a bad wound and you fear that one of those unfortunate accidents may occur which have been mentioned earlier, and there is pain in the area, then it is not necessary to apply splints. Instead, make a dressing with hard cloths instead of splints and press it on."
"And when the wound begins to form scab about one or two days after applying the dressing, then remove it and apply poultices, which are used according to our custom for healing wounds, such as 'tetrafarmacum' and similar ones."
"And it is fitting for you to cleanse the wound and examine it every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that putrefaction flows easily from it towards its openings."
"If many days have passed and the wound is not consolidated nor separated from the scab, then you should know that it is because of the small vessels. Therefore, explore the wound with a probe." "And those vessels that are separated and removed or extracted should be left alone. Those that cannot be separated and cause pain in the member should be pursued and incised according to what you consider possible."
"If pus or ichor occurs in the wound, it is called 'stymia', or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should apply one of those with which you consider appropriate for its cure, according to what has been described earlier in its chapter."
"And about this, in which it is fitting that I speak briefly and you weigh your patience: when the bone is crushed, do not presume to extract it or remove it because many times death has occurred for this reason. Leave it there until putrefaction occurs, for after twenty or thirty days it will fall out on its own. Then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it."
"Chapter XX."
"Of the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of any fracture."
"Very often this swelling occurs at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb and hinders its natural operation."
"Therefore, if the swelling is recent, apply to it medicines that have astringent properties such as aloe, resin, myrrh, and similar ones. Take some or all of them and mix them with wine that has been thickened, or with albumen of egg, or with vinegar, and apply this mixture to the swelling on linen cloth, binding it tightly in place."
"And leave the dressing on for several days without removing it. Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Or press a thin sheet of heated lead onto it, because lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs."
"But if the swelling has become hard and stiff and requires removal with caution, then incise it along its dominant seam and remove the excess or excise it with a rasp until it is removed. Then treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter XXI."
"Of the restoration of fracture when it has healed but the limb remains thin and weak, not following its natural course."
"When a fracture of the bone has healed, but the limb remains thin and weak, this occurs for many reasons: either because of too much solution of the liga
"The treatment for this is to give the patient good food to make his blood thicker, so that the blood is multiplied in him. And apply baths, and massage and laughter upon it."
"And also apply plaster onto the limb so that the plaster attracts much nourishment to it, or continue massaging it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape."
"Chapter XXII."
"When broken bones are restored crookedly, forbid their operation."
"When a limb previously restored becomes crooked or prominent during the healing process due to a break and swelling of the bone, it may appear deformed but nonetheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation; therefore do not accept the opinion of anyone who considers that limb newly broken."
"However, many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly to be condemned and causes great fear, the sign of which is deadly."
"However, if lameness and swelling are recent, then they should be fomented with hot water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as marshmallow root and rose hips, mallows, and similar ones; and a poultice should be made with a mollifying plaster like dallaquilon well-made; or the juice of marshmallow root should be pressed out and mixed with groats of wheat or oil of cinnamon and applied as a poultice; or fresh figs should be pressed and trampled with pigeon dung, and similar to those medicines called amulets for consolidation."
"And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent gentle friction which should be done in the most humid parts, and movement of the member should be administered at all times."
"However, if the deformity is already established and strong and turned into bone, and there is a need for treatment with an iron instrument, then it is necessary to cut the excess bone above and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and remove the superfluous swelling of that member with subtle incissors, and facilitate movement in that limb with diligence and care."
"Chapter XXII."
"Of speech in dislocation."
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in its place, so that it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is disfigured, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly reduce it so that it may be reduced quickly, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce.
Moreover, during this inflammation period, it should not be moved or stretched because many times it can cause convulsions and intense pain.
However, if this happens, then it is necessary that you have recourse to the cauterization of the patient and let him rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the member should be wrapped in hot water and oil, and thus reduced with ease.
And all members should be treated with what will bring them back to their original position.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation as it was previously explained in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to the lower parts.
Chapter XXIV
Of the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone.
So if both jaws are dislocated and not reduced, the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are displaced from their places by slight movement and become softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated, allowing saliva to flow freely until they are softened at the joint before they can be returned to their places nor close the mouth, and the tongue is wrapped in his handkerchief.
But if the dislocation is slight, then often it returns to its place by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then reduction must be administered gently, without delay at all.
And let the assistant hold the patient's head, and insert his fingers of one hand into the depression of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or let him insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and let the other fingers be outside the cheeks to balance them; and command the patient to close his jaws and make them still in each part; and the doctor balances the jawbone and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at once, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered, until easy reduction of both can be made without delaying reduction at all, as we have said.
And then when they have returned and are balanced, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then apply poultices of cloth with cerote, and let it be made of wax and olive oil; and let it be bound with facility with soft linen.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be placed between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left; and do not force him to open his mouth for any cause until after the pains are alleviated and the jaws are healed. Then let him eat soft food, until when he wishes to chew something.
And let this be administered with ease, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking and speaking until the jawbone is healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then often it happens that fevers and continuous sweats occur, and strong laxatives are given to the patient's belly, and strong purgatives made of hellebore.
And when you do this, then know that it is harmful; for many times the patient dies in ten days to whom this happens.
Chapter XXV
Of the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The shoulder blade is not displaced within due to its continuity with the chest; sometimes it may be displaced at the outset, which is evident by touch.
To restore it, have the patient lie on their back and extend their arms. Then press the spot with your palm firmly, for it will return to its place.
Then apply a plaster and dusting powder, and bind that area tightly.
However, if the end of that which attaches to it is not displaced on any day, then it should be reduced and immobilized according to what we have said and according to your skill.
Then apply a plaster, dusting powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to calmness and rest until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it becomes separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI
Of the reduction of muscle dislocation
You should know that muscles are not displaced except in three ways, one of which is when they are displaced from their attachment to the tendinous insertion.
And the second way is when they are displaced from their midbelly, which happens rarely; and they are not displaced at attachments behind by the shoulder blade or in front by nerves.
Muscles are most frequently displaced and exited at their tendinous insertions near the tibiae, especially in those individuals with less flesh where displacement occurs more easily. However, in those with abundant flesh, muscles exit with difficulty.
Sometimes it happens to certain men that through a blow or fall, the muscle becomes bruised and swollen with blood, causing the muscle to become displaced.
Therefore, you should immediately address this condition while it is still recent, and then proceed with its treatment.
Muscle displacement is recognized when it occurs at its tendinous insertion near the tibia. Thus, you can distinguish between a displaced muscle and an intact one by observing the obvious differences between them. You will find concavity at the head of the muscle with the tibia near the touch of the head of the muscle like a horse's hoof. The patient cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move that limb in any way.
If it is displaced from the foot or its middle part, you will immediately find a prominent touch and not hidden.
From this displacement, easy reduction can be made when it is recent and the patient is a child.
"The reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the parts; and then places their thumbs on either side of the patient's titillic; and raises the joint with strength to its proper place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends that one upwards; and then keeps that from returning lightly."
"If this does not return as described above, and if the dislocation first occurred many days ago, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in hot water; and they should also be given an ointment that softens and lubricates like this: take equal parts of rosehips, fenugreek, and poppy seeds in water, mix well, and administer."
"And then the patient should be propped up on their back and kept still around the titillic area until the joint is between levitation and structure; and then the doctor places their heel on the sphere, lifts the head of the muscle with force, and pulls the patient's arm so that it does not move from its place; another assistant should also hold the patient's head to prevent movement."
"And if you wish to reduce it in this manner: take a man who is taller than the patient and place him on the same side of the patient. Then insert his elbow into the titillic area of the patient's arm and elevate the titillic upwards while keeping the patient suspended in air; another assistant should pull the patient's arm downwards towards their own belly." "But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended along with them, otherwise they will fall and the dislocation will return quickly."
"And it can also be reduced in this manner: place on the ground a long stake with a rounded head like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place the patient leaning against it. Then cover the top of the stake with soft cloths, have the patient stand along the length of the stake with their arm extended towards the other side; and extend their body towards the other side with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly."
"And if reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned above, then use this cure: take a stake that is two braccia in length, four fingers in width, and whose thickness should be reduced at the titillic according to this shape:"
"And then place soft cloths on the rounded head of the stake to prevent injury to the patient."
"And then place the stake against the titillic of the patient, extend their arm or forearm along the stake towards the other side, and tie the stake onto the assistants' arms and hand using cloths."
"And then place the arm on a step of stairs according to its width, extend the hand towards the other side, and suspend the rest of the body on the other side, for the joint will enter quickly."
"And once the joint has entered according to each method that is possible for you, then place a pad of wool felt over the titillic. Then apply a plaster made from powdered brick dust mixed with eggs and albumen of egg over the entire muscle as it is wrapped upwards. Next, bind the titillic tightly with a suitable bandage; wind the lint around the plaster, fasten the patient's hand to their neck, and leave it in place for seven days without removing the hand."
"And care should be taken that the patient's diet is light during this time to facilitate recovery, for it will be easier to heal."
"And then gradually increase the patient's diet after seven or eight days and allow them some exercise. And once it has strengthened and is no longer tender, then it can be considered healed."
"But if the joint has been dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs there or for other reasons, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three trails according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
"But if even after all that is done the joint does not heal within seven days and remains loose even when the bandage and plaster are reapplied several times, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerves at the head of the muscle have either been severed, stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never return to its proper place."
"For the dislocation of the shoulder joint that occurs near the pit and breast or behind the shoulders, reduction is performed with force and extension using the hands until it returns."
"And then apply another bandage and treat it until it heals."
"And if heaviness or slowness occurs in the limb during recovery, then have the patient take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and the limb returns to its original condition."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
"Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty. And it can be dislocated in any direction, but most commonly towards the front or back. You will know if the hip has been dislocated because there will be a difference in length when standing or lying down according to how it was dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated hip with the sacrum, this will be clearly apparent to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the thigh, nor touch the muscle itself."
"And therefore, take care to reduce the dislocation promptly before an abscess forms because if an abscess does form it will be difficult to reduce and the limb may not heal completely; particularly when it is displaced backwards as this is the worst type of dislocation in terms of pain and often leads to death."
"And the reduction of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is performed by extending the patient's hand with two hands and expanding their arm. The physician places their hands on the hip and behind it, and pushes the joint back into place using their elbows or the edge of his palm until it returns to its proper position."
"But if the dislocation is towards the front, then reduce it by bending the hand with your own hand until you strike the hip bone with the edge of your palm."
"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and considerable force."
"And it is necessary for two assistants to extend the limb and hold it in that position so that it does not move backwards during extension."
"And then wrap the entire limb from front to back with a long folded cloth or bandage."
"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should grease it with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint. Then push the joint forcefully back into place until it returns."
"And then apply a plaster with styptic and expectorant properties made from egg albumen over the reduced joint. Bind it tightly with a descending bandage and hang the arm in a sling for several days."
"And then after some time has passed, if the joint has healed properly in its place, then you may remove the bandage and leave it alone."
"But if you find that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the plaster and bandage application, leaving it on for several more days until it has healed properly. Then remove it."
If it happens that the patient feels heavy during the reduction of the joint, and their condition is in movement, then administer humidification with baths and gentle friction, along with compression until they feel relieved. Or place a warm compress on the joint if it's a matter of fatty tissue; then bind it up, leaving that on the bone day and night. Then remove the compress and place the patient in a bath; once they're out, gently rub the joint with warm friction, and repeat the application of warmth if necessary, up to three times. During this process, continue bathing until relieved.
And if you wish, place a wet and warm cowhide fold on the joint edge, and press it onto them; do this several times until that becomes moistened and reduced in its condition.
Chapter XXVIII
**On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder Joint**
"Sometimes the hand is dislocated; its relocation is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to act quickly in relocating it at the time of dislocation before the place becomes inflamed or an inflammation occurs."
"The relocation of the hand's dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending it by the servant. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper position."
"But if the palm is already facing towards the stomach of the hand, then during extension and reduction, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsecely upon the table, so that the doctor's hand can cover that prominence of the joint."
"And therefore if it returns quickly, good. But if not, then press the hand with strength until the inflammation subsides and leave him; and do not insist upon this, for if not, neither suffering nor power can be done over the reduction of it after several days have passed."
"But however the joint returns according to its tortuosity; and do not notify the patient of any cause, but say that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen itself. Then you should know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and then it is not necessary except that it be strengthened with cautery near the site of it, and afterwards confer some cause to him."
"So when the dislocation has returned, then place upon it that pressure which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for 7 days. And also near to it be untied and let it rest, and the hand of it be exercised."
"But if the motion of the joint is stayed and any gravity occurs in it, then apply to it cold water with friction several times until it is alleviated."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of these."
Sometimes these are dislocated from all parts.
And when some of these fingers are dislocated towards the palm or belly of the hand, then stretch the finger and reduce the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And hold the head of the finger firm in place, suspending it from the side towards which it has been displaced, and leave it like that for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is straight within its day
And when it is night, bind it according to this narrative, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night. And do this for several days until it is straight
Do likewise if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand, and bind it at that joint and perform your first operation with this until it is healed.
Do similarly in this way when it is dislocated at other joints
Chapter .xxx.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine.
When there occurs dislocation of any of the spine or neck vertebrae and it is a complete dislocation where some of the vertebrae have gone out of their places, then in that case there is no cure, for death usually follows.
And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the bowels occurs involuntarily without being able to retain it. And often some members become paralyzed such as one leg or both legs, or both arms, or one of them; and sometimes a vertebra has gone out of its place, for many times they have gone out and many times they have been moved back into their places in four directions.
Therefore it is already dislocated to the posterior parts and is called sciatica.
But the treatment of it is that if sciatica occurs in childhood, then there is no cure for it nor is there any hope of complete recovery.
But in cases which occur due to falling or trauma or something similar to that, the Ancients have already described various methods of treatment at length, from which one can derive great benefit; but I will abbreviate some of those because of my proximity to the intention of my exposition, with which I have briefly explained and formed this book using diverse instruments with which I will show and explain it.
And only those are cured whose sciatica occurs properly in the back according to what I have mentioned.
And it is that the patient should lie on their face near a wall and stretch out their legs while being careful not to injure the thigh.
And then a straight stick should be placed upright, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot near the head of the patient, and another stick should be placed under their heels at the other end.
And one minister should hold the first stick firmly without letting it slip into a hollow, and another minister should hold the second according to that form.
And then wrap a cloth around the head of the patient and tie it firmly. And extend one end of the bandage to the stick which is above their head, and tie it there. And then stretch another bandage across their hips on both sides of them, and down towards their legs. And then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that is near their feet.
And then each minister should extend the bandage to the point of the stick and ensure that neither of the two sticks nor the bandages are dislocated from their places where they were fixed, but nevertheless not tied as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the vertebrae with firmness until it returns to its place, or he can place one table there and adjust his feet on top of the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, then take a plank of which the width or length is about three cubits, and cut out a space in the wall near where the patient lies into which the end of the plank can be inserted. And then place the middle of the plank on top of the vertebrae, and the physician should place his feet on the other end, and press down firmly until the vertebra is reduced and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, then turn the vertebra using your hand; and it is that you should lie on the ground near the head of the patient with two sticks behind them, each stick being one cubit long, and place another two sticks behind the head of the patient in the same manner. And let there be a space of one palm between each stick, and already made in each stick is a hole through which the cord should pass, and let each stick be firmly fixed in the ground so that it is not dislodged.
And let there also be a round stick inserted into the hole through which the cord should pass, and let this stick be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, with its length being one palm and that which is turned. And in the other two sticks there are similar ones to this.
And then tighten the bandages that you have stretched over the thigh of the patient on the stick which is above their head, and the bandages that you have stretched over their hips on the stick which is near their feet.
And then let there be a minister at each hole who will turn the stick with his hand, and the physician should press down on the vertebra as we have said.
"And now that the spine has returned, and the area is covered, it is necessary to place a hot poultice with egg whites and lint; then place a tablecloth of suitable size over the poultice, which should be three fingers wide or approximately that size, and its length should be equal to the width of the swelling; and place your hand on the spine."
"And now it is necessary to bandage it with the material we have mentioned, until the sick person's appetite returns and they are healed."
"And if there is still some swelling at the end of healing, it is necessary to apply moistening and cleansing medicines with application through a long-term plaster, as recommended earlier; and now we will apply lead foil on that area."
"And sometimes swelling occurs at the end of the spine of the back due to dislocation of that bone; and this is the bone which already threatens death, so it should not be treated with this medicine, for strong lead will cause its sudden death."
"Chapter XXXI."
"On the treatment of a dislocated hip."
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not involve only dislocation, but also occur in those where there is little movement and concavity.
The ankle joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can dislocate inwardly, outwardly, anteriorly, or posteriorly.
It is more commonly dislocated inward and less commonly dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.
"Symptom of dislocation in the inner parts is this: when you press the healthy thigh against the sick one, it feels longer and its outline more prominent than that of the healthy one; the patient cannot bend their leg. You should then search for the sign of an old bruise or hematoma, because the head of the matter has reached here."
"The sign that dislocation has occurred externally is that its complications are opposite to this one."
"The sign of dislocation that has occurred anteriorly is that the thigh expands according to its shape, but it cannot bend without pain. If pressed further, it cannot go beyond this point; urine retention and bruising are present, and walking is difficult."
"The sign of dislocation that has occurred posteriorly is that the thigh does not expand and cannot bend forward as far as the knee can bend backward. The thigh is shorter than the other one, the knee is softened, and the head of the condition is located there."
"But the reduction of cases of this dislocation is as follows: first, consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient. If it is, then do not attempt to reduce it yourself, but leave it as it is. However, if it is not in that condition, then reduction should be performed according to its nature."
"But in the case of a recent dislocation that belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, you should strive to bring back the joint and extend it both internally and externally. Move the leg right and left, because with this alone the condition will return and no further treatment is needed."
"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong bandage and extend the thigh of the leg as far back as possible, or with its muscles, or by using a loop that is tied over the upper part of the thigh. And another assistant should extend their hand over the knee joint so that they can place their fingers on the inner side of it. Then stretch tightly with a bandage made of linen placed over the ridge of the bone, and hold one end of the bandage while another assistant holds the other."
"And let the extension be from the thigh to the knee joint or from the inner side of the thigh to the outer side at the hip joint, or from the back of the thigh to the front of the shinbone."
"And let all these extensions be done at once, while the patient is lying on their back with their hips raised off the ground and their legs hanging down."
"And this type of extension is common to all four types [of dislocation]."
"And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary for each type to consider its own proper treatment."
"In the proper reduction of this dislocation, when it has occurred internally, the patient should be made to lie on their side facing away from the dislocated hip. Then place bandages over the ridge of the bone in the area between the head of the bone and the inner side of the thigh. And then extend the bandage upward from the front of the hip joint to as high as the outer part of the iliac crest."
"And then another strong assistant should grasp the leg and press on the large part of the dislocated hip joint and extend it strongly outward, because this will bring it back into its proper place."
"And this is one of the easiest treatments by which this member can be reduced, compared to the other types [of dislocation]."
"But if it is dislocated on top of you and does not obey this type of reduction, then you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong, light linen bandage over their ankles and calves."
"And let the length of each bandage be about four spans, and let the dislocated leg be extended more than the other by about two spans."
"And then suspend the patient over the head of the bed, with their hands on their hips, and let the length from the floor be about two cubits."
"And then command a strong youth to press down on the head of the bone and another youth to pull down on the leg with great force, because this will quickly return the joint to its proper place."
"But in the proper reduction of this dislocation when it occurs externally, let the patient lie on their back as we have recommended for the case of obesity. And let the bandage be tightened over the thigh of the dislocated leg and over its foot."
"And then two poles should be placed, one under the foot of the leg and the other under the head. And another pole fitted with a padded cushion should be placed in the middle, wrapped in wet cloths so that the patient is not injured by the pole being between their legs, for fear that the extension towards the outside may be drawn too strongly."
"And then each assistant should extend his respective side and the physician with one hand shall guide the reduction according to the art [of medicine]."
"But when the dislocation is at the front of the thigh, then the leg should be extended slightly. And according to this method, let the physician place his right palm on the inner side of the dislocated thigh, and then grasp it with his other hand and extend it towards the outside as far as the shinbone."
"But when the dislocation is at the back of the thigh, then it should not be extended towards the outside, but rather elevated off the ground. And let a hard support be placed underneath, just as in the case of an ankle fracture when dislocated externally, according to what we have said about the method for such fractures; and this should be done with the patient lying on their face and the bandages extended according to our instructions."
"And pressure should be applied using a board over the spot where the joint is felt."
"So when the reduction is completed as it should be, you will know that the dislocation has been reduced because you can extend both legs of the patient, and when you release them and the patient extends their leg without pain, then you will know that the member has been properly relocated. Then apply two splints and bind them firmly with a bandage so that the ankle is not displaced at any of its parts. And keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
"And then untie the bandages and splints, and compare the length of one leg with the other."
"Then if you find those things in truth, then know that the dislocation is healed, and at that point let the patient walk."
"But if you observe any signs of inflammation, then return and splint it again, extend it according to your original traction method, and let the patient rest for three more days."
"And then remove the splints and allow the patient to gradually begin walking, little by little over several days until they are fully recovered."
Chapter XXXII
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle
The ankle is dislocated in three ways: externally, internally, and posteriorly, but not anteriorly.
The sign of dislocation in this patient is that when you command them to apply their knee with the cushion, you will know that it is dislocated.
The restoration of all the movements in this patient is that you should place the patient on their right side, so that they can extend their knee if possible; then bring your left hand to their face and place their foot between your thighs; then bring your palms together with force behind their thigh, and another servant should help pull their leg back into its correct position.
The sign of recovery in this patient is that their knee adheres to the cushion with effortless elevation
Then plaster that on and apply the bandage to hold the knee in place for three or four days, then remove it.
And do not allow the patient to walk around for a few days until they are healed and comfortable
But if you cannot reduce the dislocation yourself, then apply strong traction using the methods described in the previous narrative on treating hip dislocations.
Chapter XXXIII
On the treatment of ankle dislocation
The talus sometimes gets displaced by a slight movement, and sometimes it becomes fully dislocated, either by displacement inward or outward.
The sign of ankle dislocation is that the talus appears swollen at the part where it has been dislocated
But the treatment for ankle subluxation is easy reduction, by extending the foot with ease and then inverting it until it returns to its normal position
But when treating a fully displaced ankle dislocation, the following steps should be taken:
"You should then grasp the foot with your right hand from its highest point, and with your left hand on its lower side near the ankle joint."
"Then throw the leg over your right arm and hold it there with both hands while extending your left hand. Push the heel of the foot upwards with your right hand, placing the sole of the foot on a cushion without moving."
"And do this twice as we have mentioned."
"And next, press the sole of the foot onto the third bedpost, and you are at the ankle."
"If you cannot return to this manner in one or two attempts, and if the foot remains swollen, then repeat the operation again, because that one returns."
"But if you are prohibited from performing the reduction as mentioned above, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground. Take a sturdy stone and place it firmly between their thighs, and make sure they are covered with cloth so that the patient does not slip."
"And then the minister of the knee holds their things, and another minister extends the leg with its skin or bandages on the ankle lying on top of the foot's heel. And each minister extends their side against extension, ensuring that the stone is held tightly between the patient's thighs so that the body does not slip towards both sides during this extension."
"And then the doctor will reduce the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg on both sides to prevent any further movement during reduction."
"And then, once the dislocation is reduced and declared sound by you, then apply plaster and strengthen it with bandages. And then bind the foot with bandages to the thigh."
"And be careful and guard yourself from the nerves that are behind the ankle bone, because if a bandage is applied too tightly on them it may cause injury."
"And then leave him like this for two or three days. And if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it again."
"And then remove the splint on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days." "But if he is forced to walk before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dislodged and become corrupted again, which could prevent proper healing."
"And if an abscess forms due to the cauterization, then you must administer treatment as outlined in our previous narration regarding other locations for cure and embrocation until it is healed."
"Chapter XXXIV."
"On the treatment of dislocation of said feet."
"It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be stretched with little extension without working; and that which is not difficult, let it be easier beforehand."
"But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the foot, then you should make the patient place his foot on the ground or on a table, and let him be standing thus as if walking."
"And approaching, you stand on the affected foot, and pause his foot on whatever prominence there may be of the joints, and then press it with your foot with strength until it returns, so that you see it stretched out and does not appear in its prominence."
"And approach pausing the sole of the foot on a table that takes all the foot, and then stretch it with appropriate and firm strapping for three days; and afterward unbind him and make him rest from walking for several days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured."
"Chapter XXXV."
"Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with plague or fracture or with each one together."
When some cause of that happens, and you strive in its treatment and restoration, many times death occurs.
Therefore, it is not necessary to presume in its treatment, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not hasty nor presumptuous; and that he begins by using medicines that remove blood clots alone, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, hoping for healing from harm, alleviation of illness, and showing some sign of hope. Then strive to reduce it at the onset of the cause before an abscess forms.
And if the member returns as desired, then administer treatment that will remove the abscess and heal the wound using appropriate drying agents.
And if dislocation with fracture occurs and the ends of the bone are separated, then strive to reduce them using what has been said previously regarding simple dislocations in those locations.
Guard and avoid, according to your ability, what is within the paths of fear as prescribed by my instruction; for that is better for you to owe to your Creator, more enduring for your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bukasis perfectly, may God bless him. Amen.
