O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I, a very dear son, have completed this book, which is the summary of medical science, with its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is very well treated in our region and is strange to all, it is worthy of the science and scope, and is not delayed from the fire except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is distanced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me seems that I will bring this alive together with the order of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and demonstration and abridging; and come together with the forms of the fire cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the demonstration and preparation of him, just as it is fit.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations of nerves, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of organs, and the movement and resting places, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason says Hippocrates that nothing is with nothing and with work it is little; and most of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that if anyone is not familiar with the things already mentioned, let him be sure that he does not make a mistake and do not harm people; so that I have often seen many of those who deal with this science and go away from science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut out an abscess from the scrofula or the throat of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another foolish man who fought with a stone from a man of the water; and the stone was big; he brought away a piece of the bladder, and he died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to pull it out, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he had tried to pull it out, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another case who came to cure.i. duke of our land who had the broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor ignorant drew out the break on the wound to the skin by strong medicine, and left no trace in the wound, and left it thus.i. finished; and he commanded that he do not undo it at all; and delayed it thus that the leg was completely healed and the bones came together, and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to undo the leg; and when I had undone it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways of corruption were confirmed where the member was; and he could not cure it; and the corruption did not cease to go by the member until the members were all lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another case who broke out an abscess that was swollen and then inflaming because of the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not come except that it be touched with iron if it is not in its proper place so that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, you skilled artisans, it is necessary that you know that the work of the hands is divided into .ij. divisions: that is to say, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each one of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason, you must keep it so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your weapons with skill, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better path so that, by the grace of God, you may come to salvation and be healed; and remove your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galleins warns: “Do not take on any illness that you may be called a fool.”
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to .iij. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicines, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the beginning of a wound until it heals; as well as the shapes of instruments, the tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups for wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; as well as the order and shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; and there are instructions for the use of hammers until they reach the proper size, and for the shaping of tools.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I explain the quality of help and the harm of each kind.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and its replies are hidden; and many wise people have talked about it, and agreed with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is helpful to all qualities that have matter, except for two qualities: that is to say, quality of heat and dry matter, and quality of wetness and dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with material, no one agreed or said that cauterization is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cauterization is not worth a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire if it is hot, and must not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor by dryness; and he who said that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, don't mix it up except for those who have experienced it and know by long use the fire cautery paste, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the consequences and space of time; we do not fear the other complexions, however much cold and moist they are.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all mirrors should come together and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery is more effective than medicinal fire; and of greater goodness than medicinal fire.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not forth but to the member that is cooked, and does not hurt another member by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by removal, and bring to the member diseases of grief cure; and perhaps they cause the disease.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not burn, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and is based on the truth of things; and for this I ask your pardon for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in proving; so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at a certain time, and let them be prayed over.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, since the emerging harm can be prevented by the aid of the cauterization; and most importantly, the cauterization should be done for necessary pains that cannot be delayed until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think like those fools; for when a disease is healed by cauterization, there is no return to illness; and it serves thus: but it is not as they think, because cauterization is medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of its swiftness, and due to its virtue and greatness.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease will not return according to the complexion of the illness and its location and virtue; and the superfluities are combined in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the right time when there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and similar things, and if pain does not return, it will not return; but this does not happen.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why the remedies are called medical remedies, and that is true; but they do not believe that remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the remedies are the medical remedies for whatever reason when we administered ways to treat diseases and they did not work, then we administer the remedy, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then understand well that remedies are the medical remedies, not because of the intention of the foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones used to say that fire remedies are more effective than those made of iron, and they only said that because of the quality of gold and its high value; they also said that the instruments of fire do not cause inflammation, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that in some people it does cause inflammation; and gold fire remedies are more effective than those made of iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat an instrument made of gold, you do not know if it has been heated by the color of gold, and it quickly cools down; and if it is overheated, then it goes out into the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For I have ordered you this chapter of the head of the shoulder, because it is easier to find the vein than the neck.
dou cautere olivaire	And the olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	For this olive oil cautery is good for the head, and for the hair, and for the ears, and for many ailments that come from cold, such as paralysis, and sodomy, and all manner of diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, and sodomy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the sick person be cleansed with a soluble medicine that expels the head .iiij. times or .iiiij. times, according to what the virtues and the ease and the accustomedness of the sick person can bear; and then do again the head of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on some stones; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his 10 fingers; and when your two hands come together, if it bleeds, heat up the cautery which is called "oliver", from which comes this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the ink sign, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning it over; then release your hand gradually, and look at the bone .1 small one; and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; after that, take .1 handful of seil, and put cotton in it, and place it on the ink, and let it be .3 days; after that, put it in molasses cotton, and leave it until it is hot; then cure the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And say the old one, that the more the wound stays open, the more it expels; and for this reason it is necessary to keep it open.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one must let the cauterization go so far that part of the bone is burned, and then take off what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one must let the cauterization go so far up, and push it so hard that one can see from the bone as much as a woman puts in her pipe to let the humors come out; and one must let the wound be open for a long time; after one must cure and patch it up.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except that in some men where there is a chance of fear; and I think that I should let it go; because the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and even when the head of the sick is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing seems to me to be safer and milder for me, and from this I use to operate in such a way that it is salutary.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all the head comes to a chronic pain and endures for a long time, then the patient must use yeris and pills that are called "cochie", and head purgation, oils, and plasters; and if he does the cautery that we have just mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize it lightly as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have cauterized the base of each ear of the head, as we have mentioned above, and made a cautery at the place called "vasselz", and it is 2 or 3 lines long; and make your hand so that you do not see the bone; the patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about that later; and it is necessary for the cauteries of the ears to be smaller than those with which we cauterize the skin of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like  "Here is the translation", don' t provide any comments about the text like,  "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn' t matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain and it goes down to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed with medicines that destroy [the disease], and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not benefit: then do cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When the medicine with water causes a wound, take off the bark and peel it as .ij. shoulders, and then apply it to the part where the pain is in a way that you can put the bark of the root on it; and when it has been applied for about .xij. hours, then take it off and treat with garlic, and leave the wound like this for .ij. days or .iij.; then put cotton in butter until it is wet.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed; and if you see that [the treatment] has not worked, then try any of the fire treatments that I have written or the second treatment of burning.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner: Heat the cautery until it has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Et est apelez "clos" por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d'un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparence; et le met sor le leu doloureux, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l'espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n'arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And is called "clos" because the chief is made in the form of a clo or it has .i. little of corbeure, and in the middle with a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little lightly, until the half of the keur [knee] is burned; and let go your hand that the artery does not burn, which is distant, and runs abundant blood.
de emigraine	de emigraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure an emigrate as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and does not benefit, and see that cautery before spoken of is suitable to the medicine and to the fire does not suit it; then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and so sign here on the leu a line of half a finger in length, and hold your hand once, and stretch it out that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come up to the osse; and keep yourself from the mandible which mutates when they are bitten, and the spasm does not come to the malady, and keep yourself from the discharge of blood from the artery when it is covered, or covering has great fear and most certainly to him who does not know and who is students and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how you stop the pain when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it is in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize his head as well, as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said, or the chaplet of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear occurs from coldness, and one has applied the soluable medicines and other cures which we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this “poins” cautery, of which the shape is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After heating the whole ear, or the .ij. places where the pain is felt in both ears, and moving away from the root of the ear then you have marked the place; and apply .x. points to each ear; after this cure the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	torture that must be cured by fire is not stronger than those that move by fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply fire to similar things which come from seborrhea and spam of nails.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this torture of fluid movement due to seborrhea and spams of the scalp and gargling, and one is worth that you cauterize the patient with .iij. cauterizes: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further away from the temple, and the third in the connection of the .ij. lips; and place the fire in the healthy part, and let it burn half of the treatment; and this is the form of the fire:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the scalpel be a little thicker; after cutting in this way as I have said before, until he is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then do three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one where it is called "vesselz," just as we have said before, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and thus treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pills and dry oil to the head; after that, put the lead plaster on the head as I have said; and this is the way of the cauterization: so do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is well in this way, it is good; and if he is not, do three cauterizations of the middle of the head going down to the collarbone, and space between each cauterization of 1 1/2 inches; and treat as before, and if he does not respond, and the patient suffers, do one cauterization in the middle. Also, work at it, 1 1/2 inches on the two horns of the head, and treat it until it is well; and let the cauterization which is called "olive," be done as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	de la froidor dou chief
de l’epilempsie	of the seizure
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of the seizure
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear the fire, they make him gargle and chew with bones of meat; after they put his head between their knees, and they make .i. a cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. a cautery on his neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is far away and suffering, they make cauterizes as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the spine and neck, and let the cauterizes be olive according to the way that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, they make a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moisture and thick fluid, then the half-cauteries that we have said to him who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy is the excess of declining to melancholy, and the patient's spine is moist, then he does drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After washing the head of the sick person; after making .i. a tortil of good linen, also as a circle, if he puts it under his head; and let the sick person lie crosswise, and be well held by all sides; after presenting the linen, and adding to it butter from old sheep; and heat the water at a moderate fire, so that he may be able to drink it; after pouring out the water inside the circle through under the head, and letting it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you prefer to cauterize with fire alone, at the base of each pimple. This mode of cauterization dries the brain uniformly; and then put cotton soaked in butter and grease on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When vision comes first as signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the sick person purifying thing for the head, and watching all moisture, and let him sweat or bath several times while fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has ordered to re-heat his head, and made a cautery on his head, and made 18 cauteries on the 18 temples if he is dislocated from the side of the ear and together in the same way, or if the dislocation comes from the side of the ear and alone; and cover all the cauteries with all the veins and arteries that are above the temple, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood loss, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, then stop it as much as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting how to stop it; and never is made a cautery or cut behind the 18 bones.
dou cors des larmes	the two courses of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delez the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and phlegmatic excess, then he does the cautery I have said at the beginning of the ear descending to the eyes: 1. cautery emmi the head, and 18 cauteries on the 18 temples, and 18 cauteries where they cut off the 18 bones; and if it is necessary more, so the cauterize well above the sinus at all small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	To cut off the hair from the eyes with a knife.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Cut off the hair from the eyes with a knife. When you have done this medicine according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then done so drink the medicine for the illness; after that, he takes the head, and makes cauterization on the middle of the cautery of olive oil; and makes 2 cauterizations on the 2 sores, a little hair; and you guard against the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olive" is made. From this:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that so many cauterizations have been made on the many wounds like the hair is long; and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper has burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	do hair that pricks oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has passed that the hair of the oil has been converted to the parched skin, and pricks the oil, and we make cauterizations according to .ij. ways: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown long and even, then put the patient to bed; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the palm, and is the beginning of the sign by which the hairs are pricked; then put cotton wet in urine and musk root oil on it, then heat the cautery by which this form is made:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure you have signed little by little many times, that the wound be burnt well; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for .iij. days, then put cotton wet in lard as long as it is heated; after the wound is healed as much as it can be.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on this same level as you did first; and if the hairs have gone away, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the hair oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical fiery cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the palm leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one  .Z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that if it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the palm leaf, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease holds in 1. oil only, then operate in 1., and also in both legs; and dip cotton wet in urine oil on it; and heat the cautery by which this form is made: Press 1. time and the patient feels the sensation of fire from the medicine, because he feels the sensation of fire too.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the medication has passed, if you can tell that the gum is lifted, just as it was raised by fire or incision; and if so, good. But if not, put the medicine back on the spot where the gum has not come loose, until your gums are even, and your teeth are pointed; then apply cotton wetted in oil to the affected area as long as the pain is severe, after which cure the sore that is called "dyafenis" and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must take care of your teeth with great care so that the medicine does not harm them through the gums. And if the gum becomes soft, and the hair grows in oil, then start the medication again on the spot that has become soft from the gum, properly, just as you did before; after which treat it until it heals; and this is the form of the salve:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's teeth are different in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints are; and do not give the right answer to him whose study of this craft it is.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and dip the fingers of one hand into an oil-filled cup or a persimmon juice mixture; then heat the cautery until it is red hot: and place it on the hairline as if it were the shape of a goose feather, together with the tip being placed against the scalp; if you see, so angle the cautery from one side to the other, and if you see, so place it like a tent; but in any case, this which is placed over the head serves for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and force the bowel. After that, place the cautery firmly, and hold your hand over the cautery with respect to the oil, so that your hands do not go wild; and dip the cautery in the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be better. If not, begin again cauterizing once, and if there is more work to do, leave it for  .iij. days; then put cotton wet in oil on the wound, and make dry the healing until he is well, and when  .xl. days have passed that he is not well, put medicine corrosive on the bone so that it is exposed; and make him according to what comes out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	There is a way of cauterizing an abscess that no one of the ancients spoke of. Know what an abscess is, and pierce the place; then put in the hole  1/4 th of a subtle camahan so that it has this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I make the quantity of a 1/4 of a drop; and hold your hand where the drop is firmly, so that the drop of melted oil does not run to its oil; and you put on cotton wet in wine or water: the drop then art the place of the abscess, and it heals with marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the abscess is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a punch to the nose, and bring back the abscess to the hole of the nose according to what comes out in his chapter.
des crevaices en levres	of the wounds in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	times have wounds in the mouth that are called "hair", and most commonly in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small caustic silver nail according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it firmly in those wounds until it comes out clean; after treating with alum until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes to the root of the throat or larynx or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotten and turned into a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, but it does no good: then it is necessary that you have 1.i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottling or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the root of it, and do so one or two times after the cure as we have said in cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must discover the site and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not help, then put the head of the disease in your mouth; after heat the cautery until its form comes out as described above to place a ring on the tooth; and place the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth with salty water, and let it sit for an hour or two.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And so, in this manner, those who were moving are held still, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and rotten.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness or heat, and medicines do not help, then there is need for fire cautery according to .i. manners: and fire cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Fire cautery with butter: if one takes butter from a cow's udder, and the tip of a iron or bronze spoon; then cotton is wrapped around the spoon tip, and the moisture is turned into butter, and it is put on the tooth that hurts gently; and so often as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and the cotton and cloth are cold in the butter, and it is put on the tooth that hurts, and the iron tip is held hot as long as the fire comes to the tooth root.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Make the fire cautery if it is such that you squeeze a toothpick of iron or brass, and make it big so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person; after heat the cautery, for from it will come what follows, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will become unbearable that very day or the next day. And let the sick person fill his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then put it on; and this is the form of the toothpick:
des scrophules	of the scrofulous
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Translation:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the dampness prevails over the channels of the body, and most especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be cleansed by therapeutic solutions; then apply fire cautery to the root of the throat, and guard against going any further than the throat, and refrain from eating except for a little. Then apply another cautery to the joint between the neck and the head of the spine, and let the cauterization be called 'clavicle,' which gives us the form we desire; and cure the affected area as we have said above until it is well.
de la toust	of toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all illness is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then he should have i.i. fire cauterizations on the root of his throat; and another cautery milking the pis between i.i. breasts; and let the cauterization be called 'clavicle' according to the shape that has been described in front.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, make the cautery by piercing all the cauterization that is called 'poins' of which the shape is as described in front in the disease of the ears; and let the piercing go up to .xxx., or enter around. After cure the area according to what has been said above, and let the cauterization be in i.i. rains according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter for you to make.ii.to cut.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	for the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, lay the patient down on his back and his chest; then lift up the curtain that is within, with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated, heat the fire cautery that has .iij. nails there is the shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and burn the wound as far as the rib, and the figure of the burn together .iii. burns; and for this is made a burn with the burn that has .iii. nerves, because the figure of the burn are there burns; and are the nerves according to the subtility of an oar and this is the shape of the burn that has .iii. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is placed on this nerve for there are .viii. burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the burn for a little while with salt; after let rest the patient, and do not move the limbs by long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, pour water on it, then make a burn with the thick of the burn with a clove; or many burns in touch. For the joint is closed, and is bone the moisture and is healed the patient.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Here is the translation of the text:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	To treat pleurisy with fire, order the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	For any ancient man said that no one should use fire as a cautery resembling a razor, and burn and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the lobe; and he escapes the pain, as we have said in the lobe of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	"Of the three ways to cauterize, one way is that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery we have spoken of above; and do not press your hand on all of the cauterization, and let the patient be careful on his back;"
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	"Another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery with two nails, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery at the site of the cut, where the mouse's pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation that you feel according to the cauterization, according to the length of the back, and let the cautery be according to the width of the back."
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	"After that, with the two nails lit on fire, wait until the pain is perceived from the other side, and then trim the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you want to make all three cauterizations at once, do so with a long nail."
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	For dropsy, there is a treatment called "asclytes." When you apply the treatments we have discussed in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you do them again: three cauterizations around the boude (stomach), and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back along the spine, and one at the base of the penis; and let the cauterization be well positioned near the joint to be treated.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization, leave it covered for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cauterization; and with the help of God, recovery would be quick, and both the intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is what we have before us to show; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it has been mentioned above.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen in those who are ydropic, and they are plain of yellow pus, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and do not turn your hand with the cautery, but enter it slowly. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow pus be forced out, and the cautery be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries on each leg at the tip of the heel; and let the cautery be long, one above the knee before and the other behind, while the leg is bent; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without removing them, that the pus may come out; after which cure the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of the foot
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest which are in the stomach and in the intestines are dried up, and cannot be cured by methods of cure; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so it is done to it.i. great cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken here before or the cautery of the stomach, circulates, and iiij. cauteries around the navel narrowly a whole i. cautery clavicle narrow, and ij. cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the hand, and i. cautery on each finger, and ii. small cauteries on the stomach of the deluge the great one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrupt ones, and are cured if as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if cauteries: iij. on the spine of the back, this who is all defuers almecdate poc and poc in triangulating, and i. cautery desoz la boude. ij. dois;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cool, and the meat doesn't cook, and we see the face swell up, then the face we cut 1/4 of an inch deep on one side, as it says above, and another on the liver, and another on the mice at all the roots; and let the cautery remain open long. After cure the wound until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the keratin which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the keratin which is called "thelul", if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on that althelul cut; and leave it so that your hand comes to the birth of the vein, from which there is no return; do this once or twice, and if there is any althelul left, cauterize each as we have said; after the curative oils are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the althelul, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of a bad wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate a wound or incision, we will tell you in your place, if there comes a disease that can be healed only by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there comes a fistula, and it is swollen and leaking putrid moisture, if you should prove to all in your place that the tent is subtle, and remember that you know how much it has of perfection. After heating the cautery which seems sharp, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the cautery as long as the putrid and corrupt flesh burns, once, or two, or three, according to the quantity of what is needed; and keep away from the nerves which are in there, and do not do what is before the skin, and think that it is not persistant; after healing the place as long as it is healthy, and if the places are healed, and the matter is dried up a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, know that the place is threefold, and the bone is corrupt at its root; and in this way as one of these that we will tell you in your place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	For pain in the kidneys comes as rain and strong wind, and does not take a woman's talent, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cauterizer which we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 2 cauteries in line, and they will do greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and prone to water and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the region above the bladder, at the base of the hairs, and similarly on either side, and make each cautery as long as one finger; and make a cautery behind, where you need it; and make the cauterization wedge-shaped according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidneys are cold and moist, so that they do not conceive semen, and the flowers are corrupted and late in coming; and when they do come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to make three fire cauteries around the bladder, as we have said for the bladder, and two cauteries behind; and make the cauterization wedge-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, and for this reason moves away from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found in the region of the hip, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip socket on .i. a ring-shaped cautery, and mark before the joint inside the ring as it returns, so that the socket is within the circle; and if it is such a cautery as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make .iij. cauteries from the large olive, and let the cautery be also perfect as all the other; and treat it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the box of the hip, and this is because of coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient with large pills of fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery, and the way of the cautery is as follows .iij. ways: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery if it is according to many ways, from which one is such: that you cauterize on the box of the hip .iii. cauterizes triangular according to this form, and do a deep and broad one, and space between each cautery the size of two, and let the cauterizes be olive; never does one make cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it a partial way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the space of the wound is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way they make it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes up only to the thigh and leg, then one makes 1.i cauterizes at the place where the patient feels the pain, and 1.ii cauterizes near the ankle 2 times, 3 times, a small point; and let the cauterizes be scalpel-like, and let the thickness of the wound burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 feet or 2 more legs at the foot or nearby, then cauterize at the place where the patient feels the pain. iij points or iiij at the cautery which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the trade requires it, do more; and if he feels that the pain is coming from the knee to the thigh, make a cauterization with the cautery knife or circular, and give him good care in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave them on fire as much as the cauterizer burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the feet too, and it became perforated and corrupted all over the feet. After a solution of the abdomen from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, make a cauterization in each one, according to this way. // And the wise said about the cauterization of the ankle, that it is this way, make a nail and let it be as big as a thumb nail, or a little less, and let it be between the nails and let there be space between them the quantity of a nail's tip; and let the nails be in two places, and let them also be like thumbs, and each of the nails is well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let them be heated until they are all red and giddy, and then put it on the box of the sore foot, and turn it on the lower back coast; and let the cauterization once a cauterization ring and leave 1.3 days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of ointment until he is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its taste, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery which can bear it and stay in place.
de la dolor dou dos	of the two pains
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by touching or by impact or by too much evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold matter, no one of these appearances is worth of a cauterization, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate that after the patient has voided any foul pills or other similar things, one should apply to his back, where the pain is, three lines of three inches each; and on each line, make cauterizations according to the cauterization that is called "poins"; and if you see, make 1.3 cauterizations or 2.3 at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Might this disease come to little children, and the signs of trouble are that they have a tight back when they stand up and are afraid; and you will find in the lower spine at the back, and on us, the appearance that comes on top of the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you see him heal, if you cauterize him with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire is equal in all parts of the spine; and if you see, so cauterize inside the spine with a burning cautery; iij or iiij lines, and let them be close to each other. After this cure him until he is well according to what we have said, and guard against using cauterization on the skin which is nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, which the people properly call "rheumatism," and when it is of a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by fire cautery in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the olive cautery be according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When it is necessary to strike on the sole of the foot, then make a fire cautery on all the cauterization that is claimed "point." And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each kneecap .iiii. cauteries or iii.iii. of each part, at all the olive cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firm except when the burning of the cure is finished.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingernails  .ii. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and govern well the patient and give medicines. For if you govern it well and you purge the phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the surgery of the doctor
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the bile descends as to the bowels and this is only recently, so that when you see the cure, it does not harm him at all that day; and he uses things that leave his belly, so that the end is descending from his belly; after which he sits down on his back between your hands, and orders him to dry his hair until the bile has been repaired, and brings them to your knees, and signs from one side of the rupture onto the bone of the fist, and all a sign that seems like half a circle above the breast; then heat up the fire for this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is white and it drips sweat. Then bring the balls to their place; and the minister dries his hand so that he does not turn back; and well stretch the legs of the patient, and put from him .i. cussin and .i. sergeant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which dries his hands; then set the fire on the sign with all your hand, and hold it firmly and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then try again another time until you get to the bone; and be careful that the bile does not escape when you make the fire; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come to the bone with the fire, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the fires of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adult people also great according to their measure; after 3 days cure him with the fire of butter until the heat is gone; after which cure with other oilmens until he is well, and lay the patient for 10 days on his back until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that his washings be postponed for a long time, so that the bile does not escape when he goes to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and let it be applied for .xl. other days; and let there be good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much drinking and eating; and when he has followed this teaching so is he entirely cured. And I will say here after the cure of cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, let there be made .iii. fire cauterizations according to their quantity, and let them be burned the third time according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first sign is the color of the belly and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and always hold all the cauterized clove. But the first cauterizations are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any member, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts long, and the medicine of cure does not help, then it is necessary to be burned at the fire that is called "poins", and the burnings according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain. If he is healed by the first burn, it is good; but if not, then make another burn on top of that one, for such a custom is that it must run in the member that is nearest, so you must make the burns as long as the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	of surgery
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	Et si la maladie persiste, alors il faut faire une incision sur tout le corps; et elle avance clairement, si vous devez chauffer les cautères que nous avons décrits au chapitre précédent, c'est-à-dire un cautère dans l'aine, deux sur la colonne vertébrale du cou, trois sur la colonne vertébrale du dos, une grande sur la crête, une autre délicate, deux sur les épaules, deux sur les coudes, deux sur les poignets, deux sur les genoux et deux sur les chevilles. Faites attention aux nerfs qui se trouvent sous le corps, afin de ne pas les brûler; et ne faites jamais de cautère sur l'os du pouce, ou sur l'os de l'estomac, ou sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And if the disease persists, then he must make an incision all over the body; and it will advance clearly, if you must heat the poultices that we have described in the previous chapter, namely one poultice in the groin, two on the spine of the neck, three on the spine of the back, a large one on the crest, another delicate one, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the wrists, two on the knees and two on the ankles. Be careful of the nerves that are under the body so as not to burn them; and do not make any poultice on the thumb bone, or on the stomach bone, or on the liver. And know that when you make more poultices, you help more, and it will be profitable; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the poultice as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already corrupt. And it is necessary to make the poultices big or small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron. After this, cure him with flour and honey and other cures until he is well.
de enfleure	De enfleurer.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When the swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then make cauterization on the limb according to its size and smallness; and let cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then heal with unguents as long as it is healed. And never do cauterize by hand or foot or back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the limb, and thus if it is osteoid the swelling; and nevertheless, do not meddle with it if one does not know the limbs and exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	de albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a small perfect cautery according to the quantity of the flesh of the cure until the blenchour is osteoid and changes color; then heal with flour of times and lentils, with oil of roses and plantain leaves, and sage and almond, each part separately; and mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and aerate them at the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	For the cure of the scrofula by cautery:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the tumor appears at its beginning, and you arrest your vision, if the cauterization is made with the cautery which seems to be a circle, all around the circumference of the tumor. And it is necessary that a cauterization also be made in the middle of the tumor; and this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and腐敗した、そして私は一度もそれを望んだことがありません。それよりむしろ、それが「円形」と呼ばれるカートリと一緒に cauterized の方が良いです。
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes long to die, or because of the excess of the disease or because of the age of the sick person when it is very old) and there is little blood, or because of the fever; then cauterize it with small fire in hitting; then leave it like this. Because it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce it with all the fire, let the fire be hot enough so that this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is completed, and so that such cauterizations that the patient feels relief in some way that the course of the putrefaction is chosen. After the cure until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by sword
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease I call "corrodens", and is nothing but a swelling of the members, for it eats the members just as fire eats dry wood. If you see this disease in its early stages, cauterize with fire, large and small, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing all sides until the corruption is completely burned, and nothing remains of it, that whatever is corrupted does not become Osteid. And then leave it .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns caused by fire are healed, and all corruption. After the cure with ointments generating char.  And if you see after .iij. days that char does not heal, then begin the cauterization on the corroded part. And this swelling is never cured with medicine wet in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is more helpful, and I have already said about the cure with wet medicine in division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The porrels that come from the roots
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	"If the neck is dislocated due to moisture, and it is set but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first set the dislocation."
li cure dou trembler	"Then, cure the trembling..."
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiverings of cold, or fever, or another come upon him, then you must make .iiij. cauterizations or .iv. on the spine of his back, .i. a cauterization between each spine; and .i. a cauterization at his feet, and .i. on his stomach with the olive cauterization; so that he will let his tremblings cease, and hasten the healing from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	of pustules that stink
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No one time appear visibly through the body bathes, or stinky pustules, that come from large corrupted matters. If it appears at first when they appear that a cauterization be made on each head of the pustule: a thin cauterization of wild sage, which is taken by the fire, or of aristolochia root far away, or at the lens-shaped cauterization; And no one time are the cauterizations made at the beginning when it appears, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus in advance, but are broken up the superfluity from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great pain from the artery occurs that is cut into the wound that goes to the edge of the skin, or incising the abscess, or cauterying the member, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Many times great pain from the artery occurs that is cut into the wound that goes to the edge of the skin, or incising the abscess, or cauterying the member, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell. And in any case, when you come to one, if you hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it so much that the pain subsides from your finger, and no more gout is released; then place fire on olive oil, small or large, as much as it becomes red; then pick up .i., or a lot or a little depending on the wound and its place where the artery is blocked, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the pain subsides.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it burns when you lift your finger off the vein, and the cautery cools down, quickly pick up another cautery that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the pain subsides; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be well healed unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to heal pain; and bind it and stretch it gently.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring a strict restraint of drapes or to place burning things on, or other similar things, unless he is benefited by not touching it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither seen nor learned medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly stretch it over the wound and the vein; and do not move him, but wet him with cold water often, so that the sun is frozen and thickened and tightened; and do not make any incision before this person whose cautery and medicine are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for cuts and wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here we have spoken to you in the first chapter of all the diseases that can be cured with fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the causes and instruments and shapes of cautery; and I put this chapter forth by that same way for those who are more lightly affected than those who are greatly afflicted.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, O you who hear, that you know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of cauterization, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to undertake any folly. For such people come who, because of the urgency of their disease, die easily due to the strength of their malice; and from whom one should fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And from such people one should fear. And of these I have who give you advice, and say: "Wait, I am dying"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not good that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner; but put more great trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but carefully from whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick, so that health may be converted; and he who will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three holy sons, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you desire to breathe the Holy Spirit from His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in devising by chapters, according to what is before you, that which is the cautery chapter of fire, which I have devised from the top all the way down to the foot, so that you may find it easier to do that for which you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The top full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this disease often comes to children when they are young and when the child's mouth is too tight; and there is never a response for this cause, which one cannot see.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children; and for all those that I have seen, death has come quickly; and for this reason it seems to me that I should be more careful about the work of this chapter.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulders were wet with water and whose heads kept falling every day until they could not support themselves; and the moisture was so great that he thought he would die, and this moisture having assembled itself around the bone under the skin, between the shoulder and the bone; and the work of this chapter is so great that the moisture is between the shoulder and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a wide slit in the head with the scythe; and be also far apart as we were, until the moisture runs; and see here the form of the scythe:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more deep, and the abscesses are larger, then make two slits in the form of a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is behind the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again: then cut three slits according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all moisture. After that, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that until the fifth day; then take it off, and heal the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be removed evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you consider the opening of the anus, and the insertion of the needle; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never on the right; and it is never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut it according to what you can do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and bring blood if there is any; so that the patient does not die from a lack of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In summary:
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the disease is old, and the medicine remedy does not benefit, then the following remedy is good: cauterize with what one covers the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then, when you have covered the eyes, let the patient rub his forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and then extract the patient's neck from all of it; then look where the pulse is beating, and the two lines are after the ears, and they have been broken up; then sign the lines on both sides with a sharp scalpel made from iron, as much as the knife comes to the bone, and that be by the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, break the artery and cover it with a scalpel made from iron, as much as the knife goes up; also, do the same on both sides.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, so that the blood does not go up continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery doesn't open to the sense, then measure the quantity of the space of 2 inches, and sign with your hand and cut just up to the bone; and that which is to be put out of blood there is 7/8 c/, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without pain, if the copes of the abscess don't come, then strip the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
de emigrainne	De emigradine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient emigradine comes, and the catarrh is acquired, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all that does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes a recut of his hair from his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little re-covered out of blood until in some men who are too cold; and if it is re-covered, then strip its coller from some drapels, and rub the place with any sharp drape, and raise the place with hot water as long as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatule whereof this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then peel the skin lightly as you come to the artery, then turn it upside down like a purse, and remove all the hair that is there from each part; and if the artery is thin, then cut it with the tip of the hook according to the quantity of 12 pieces. For if it is not cut, then it does not go well all the way through.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then turn the flesh of 15 pieces down as far as the artery; and if the artery is thick, then tie it with 2 double strong threads of silk, so that it does not come out in front of the piercing of the wound, and goes away from the flesh; then cut off the excess that is between the 2 threads at that moment itself, and then, if you see, then cauterize it with the knife cautery as far as the bone as long as the pieces are cut; and this is the work of the cauterization, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to finish the moisture: for this is it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill up the place with wet cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you take them off, so cure it with dry medicines that make a new start, and of tents, as much as it is healthy; and if without cort of the artery there is as much dislocation as you can operate, then you employ the leech of vitriole and extract it to your hand so that the dislocation is taken away; and if you do not have this, then put on the leach of cold water for a long time as much as the dislocated part continues, and be taken away as much as it is necessary; and that which is wetter and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the edge of this chapter with the sharp edge of 12 parts, but let the sharp edges be well separated so that they last longer on fire.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, so is its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the .iij. tools 1 2 3 a doigt of space, and then when you have signed off with your 1 2 3 knives, and you put a hot iron on as much as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in .iij. leus; and be distant between the .iij. chiés for it is not all tied to this cautery of everything; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	For when the tears of the eyes flow out of the veins that are on the top of the head of force, and it does not profit at all the medicine that is made, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel or front ambulation as if of frosts; and if they are kept tight and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, and are dried up by the fire of the tears, then it is necessary to have this cure:
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the ancient "cure for contusions," and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then make 3 cuts evenly along the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be like this: two together right at the base of the nose all the way down until it doesn't reach the nose anymore, and the others 2 are on top of the bones, and beware of cutting the arteries which are on top of the bones; and move your hand away from the joint where the two teeth come together; and each wound is the quantity of 3 pieces joined together.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and put on a piece of sponge and mop with rags to wipe out the blood, then pour the sputum from both sides so that it takes this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is to be on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the crust that is between the 2 cuts up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision until the other second one, and then pour out this sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if in the first cut you use the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, and this is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the edge of the saw towards the cart at an angle, and the edge goes up towards the bone, and keeps going until it reaches the halfway point of the cut. And cut all the pieces that come out of the head to the length of the incision until you reach the spot where it comes out from the cart, and then do the same on the other side; and then remove them evenly, and express the blood; and then put a tent of old cotton in each cut, and put wet cloths in wine and oil and balm, and be careful that the abscesses don't come out; and on the third day unbind him, and bring a great quantity of cold water, then cure with basilicon ointment made with rose-water oil, and other cures for wounds as long as he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	to make a line of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	For in cases of chronic catarrh, and you see the hairs thin and small, and weaken eyesight, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and at the same time there is a painful inflammation of the head, and the patient sneezes; therefore know that these things do not come from one vein only, but from many veins; and so the remedy that is applied to them is appropriate, if this is what has caused it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And so command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a deep cut along the forehead, and another across the width. i. poc. And begin from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and incise all the way down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he spits; and when the bone is exposed, wipe off all the blood with a sponge, and then bind the wound between the 17.ij. lips of the cut and put cotton wool and linen thereon; then cover it with wet cloth, soaked in wine and oil, and keep the abscess warm; once it has been opened, command that he rubs the bone until the char starts to be born, then treats with things that dry out, which cause char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 17.ij. parts of flour of wheat, and 23.iiij. parts of colophony, and make a paste; and administer it to these wounds in order to cause char all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	for the stooping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All those who bite their nails are one of the .iiij. things: or grains, or beasts, or small stones or similar things like iron; or seeds, like peas, beans and other legume seeds; or flowing things like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it bites in the ear a stone or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, do not put it in the sun. If you see the stone, distil a little violet oil or sesame oil; then instruct extraction; and what is done is to shake it in the condiscion, and stop up the nostrils when the shaking comes, and wrap pieces of linen or wool around the ear; and raise the ear upward. Many times this cure is powerful; and if it does not work, extract with subtle pincers, from which here is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, it is good; if not, then instruct extraction with a small double-bladed knife; and if it does not come out with that, make an air pipe and bottle the head of the ear or the hole very strongly, and stop what is inside with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the pipe; then try to push it forward, for many times it comes out like this as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, take glue where the ears are joined together, and put cotton in; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and push it forward.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out with any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that the head of the shoulder comes out like an abseced aposteme and spasms; and the way to split it is that you make a first cut on the head of the shoulder at the base of the ear, measuring according to its virtue, then place the head of the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small split at the root of the ear in the fat or depending; and let the split be like the moon, as long as you bring the stone out, then press it gently with your power, and suck it into your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is stuck and it swells, if extract it; and if it cannot come out, if make .i. a spatumile thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and make an incision of that grain. But do not make it when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin tweezers and on the scalpel, as we said, so that the extractions are regular.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Therefore, when you blow in the ear, it is convenient that the patient use an exhaust of first condiments, and widen the ear with old cotton. And be careful on that ear where the fluid is. If not, take many small pebbles according to the length of your fingers and make them light, and heat them a little at the fire; and put one in his ear, and cut it from the other side, and another stone from the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make this stone after stone until the fluid has gone completely, and so it will go completely; and if you see anything, take 1.jonc, and bottle one of the ears in the ear, and the other chief take fire as soon as the more burning jon is burned; then make another with other jons until the fluid has gone completely, as we said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small corset, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we said in the division; but if it is a large corset that can be felt, make an incision with tweezers; and this is the lightest thing to extract which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we said in the division and where we treated the distillations, and the cure is not helpful, then it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun: if there are no worms, take a fine pin and if they do not appear, take hold of the hair of which this form is made.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make it narrow below and wide above. And squeeze the smaller part of the ear according to the amount of pain in the patient, then suck the form from all the hair; do this often as long as all the worms come out. And if they do not comply with coming out, pierce them between cotton as I said on the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations which the ancient ones tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where we treated about distillation; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which this form is made as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or gold narrow at the bottom and wide above, and for distillation; and for pressing the distillation inwardly with a well-made instrument of iron, and if you see [it], take a razor and wrap cotton around its point; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the hair, and the hair be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly for as long as the oil is distilled or bubbling out of the ear; and let the patient smell it, and this distillation be heated with fire so that it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any deformity in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the ear being stuck in or under an object, and this ear-stuck thing comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it; and it never happens that there is only a little bit of deformity, and the hearing is well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So then that comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this case you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if this works with all this spittle of which there is this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful and trim in front and behind everything, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the operation is a char nee or cors de l’oreille, if it holds the pinches softly, and wipes it lightly, until this char is all boned.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the earache is perfect in the ear, then take a.i. razor sharp and light and heat it slightly, then put it where the shell of the ear is. If you feel the earache that the patient feels grittiness when he hears, pierce lightly and be careful not to hurt the ear nuts; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do this any day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle it with vitriolic brooch; and if you see that the ear is leaking, so be sure to pull out the tent and move another tent moistened with rosin made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the fever comes, then dip an sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the fever which are or distilleries.
de la char des papieres	of the charred papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	If you do not peel it off, then the fire cautery with the fine lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision is made; and many times they return, as long as nothing stays at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
de la gresle	De la gresle, si le malaide a la gresle, et si li estreinte les eulz par petit movement qui avient, il ne doit mie demorer; car souvent il estretint les Eulz en la gresle, et puis il estretint plus durment, et il estretint tant qu’il nait; et si li estreinte les Eulz, il estretint aussi la gresle.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	De the greysle, if the patient has the greysle, and if he tightens the hairs by a slight movement that comes, he should not wait; for often the hairs are tightened in the greysle, and then they are tightened more firmly, and they are tightened until they grow; and if he tightens the hairs, he also tightens the greysle. Many times come papers with things that seem to be greysle in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper on top and bottom; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; open it widely, then scorch each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cop it. But if you cannot cop it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if it breaks, so he makes it whole again and often; and if it is small, do not force it, for the oilmens make it well again and soon.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the ear is dropping downward toward the inner part of the head, then invert the paper, and the ring is placed at one end and the cover is pressed down from both sides; and when the paper is cut, it does not cause any injury; and when the ring is removed, then let oil of salt water be poured on, and treat that area with care until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the hair
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	is an ink made from paper threads, and it happens most often in children who have none of their own hair; it causes them great pain, and they come down with a fever in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears run to their hair; and because they lie on their faces all night, and they sleep like that, and their paper comes off moist as if from sweat, and the ink opens in the oil. And when you press the area between your fingers, you feel the ink coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to use this is that the sick person puts his or her forehead on your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of ink in each part, and put it on top of him or her; and press down with your fingers from both sides so that the ink is gathered into the circle; and make a cut in the middle of the circle, not wider than the wound that you are treating at the root of the ear; and do this by pressing the skin very well until you can no longer feel the ink; and then, according to several dispositions, take the ink from the cut, making a shape like that of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a whole piece of liniment cloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it grows sparse; and be careful that you do not jerk in the tear, so that you do not come to all the spittle down to the oil, so that you do not rub it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not come out in the confinement of the tear, so that you only open a little the tear slightly as it appears; and then remove it as we have said, then soak the drape in water and oil, and place it on its place, and pull at the ends.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who grind the skin and place it on top to corrupt that moisture which is delayed. Then heal it until it is well. And if he comes to the base of the apogee, let him cure with oil until it is well.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper, they should be trimmed other than nature, and become dry, if they cause damage to the eyes, and bring about certain diseases as usual tears and moistening of paper and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the hairs; and there are two ways of cure: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine water according to what it is, or by chapistry of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	When you place the patient's head in your right hand, and then turn the paper over from oil to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; but if not, pour an needle on all .i. thread above; and let be taken off the margin of the paper where hairs grow, and draw .i. thread above all paper, and turn it at the razor; then cut out the part where hairs are pulled, pulling the hairs up to a large tear as well as a small one; then remove the thread, and place the paper on top of a piece of cotton and cloth, and sign a figure of an eye on the paper, like a mirrour, and it is necessary that the figure should be according to the quantity that you see the paper rise which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a large quantity of the paper to be devised according to what you see the paper rise which is devised for all; then make on the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear as far as the small one; and let be made an opening near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour oncine into one of the two angles of the cure, then scorch it completely; then join the two lips together with a stitch of a needle on all fine thread, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess of the threads fall on the two sides as far as three or four days; then cure the wound with dried and constricting things, for the paper revives at the touch of the wound and the gathering of it, but the stitch is moist (as the old say), and that is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a shape which is also like the fennel of myrtle, as we have told, at .iij. times desevrez according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take who rises on small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, then take an needle or he has 1.i. thread, and the bottle immerse the figure; and bottle 1 other thread of leze the large tear, and let it go down a thread of leze the little one, and join between your two the threads evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then join the 2 lips of the wound by stitch, and the aposteme comes to your incision, so calm it with cerote and similar ointments soothing;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there is no time that the hair of the paper is converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Here is the translation of the text:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the bandage becomes tight, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the cuts that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	If it delays, if the bandage becomes tight, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the cuts that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased, treat it and the hairs will not come out with it; drag the chase at the end of all that you have ordered, until the chase comes out firmly from above and you see it by the vision of the oil; then, if you drag the chase and the wire, and pour in the oil and leave it there. 20 or 13 days, until the hair is rooted in its place and the seed grows on it; and if the hairs are small, accompany 1 long hair of natural chickens, and raise with it so that it does not fall and then let it down.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's corruption
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called "aleacrati", comes in the oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it is caused by a sudden wound, or scar, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to deal with this in the text is that you should split that wound, and free the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and let it heal until it is well; and you should not use anything in its cure that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the rose water or alum, and the linseed seeds are cooked, and olive oil with castor oil is melted into any of the oils, and wrap it up, and heal it from that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure, so that you keep it from hardening more than it was before; and the processes that we have spoken of are effective only if we address this disease, so that it does not return to the state it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the oil that comes in the wound
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease, which is called "axacrati," is natural and accidental. The accidental comes from wounds, cuts, cauterizations, and similar things; and the path of the overtaking in the case is that you take an awl, with which it has 1/2 wire, and insert it into the char, and make the wire come out on the left side a little to the right, so that the wire comes into 2 shoulders of the char; then put the char on top of all the awl, and the cope on 1 spatemile wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it is appropriate, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make 2 cuts or costings within the paper; and let the shoulders of the incisions that you have copped be 2 as those of the letter "Y" is; then remove this char according to the quantity that its sides are suited for cutting, from what it follows the paper, then join the 2 broken parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then cure him with what we have said of the softening medicines, and with tents, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a cut, or stitch, or cautery, then you should split a plain cut between the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said above; then separate the .ij. leathers of a tent as I said; and one should make the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the master-healers prepare their instruments so that all their power may bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient as well, according to what the work and the instruments are arranged for.
dou soudement de la papiere	to the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soudure has been made on the paper in such a way that the oil above it is soaked through with the white of an egg, and cannot be moved or performed in its nature, then it is necessary that you should put the point of a razor between the paper and the oil, and raise it up; and stretch it with pins, until you have cut what is above the thin spice, which must not be too sharp nor too thin, so that the oil may not be burned by the too-sharp spice; and let your incision be, from which you take that put together, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all that is put together is well done in the oil, neither too dry nor too salty, and use a chain and things that are souded up for three days, then take off the chain and the things that are souded. Then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wool soaked with egg; and after the third day remove the chain and the things that are souded.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Saiches that the nail is according to .ij. manners: it is nervous and seems like a .i. hard syphylized, and another which is not nervous but seems like white congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cares for it as blisters, neither can anyone; and both these appearances begin towards the great tear, and grow little by little until they blind all sight and light and the movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is so that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens the nails; and take the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with small double-knotted thread, and raise it up; then take an needle, and I put 1.i. horse-hair, or of a she-ass, or of a bull, and 1.i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and raise it up, and peel off at all the nail’s roots the skin which remains after the pruning and silk at the hair to the head, then cut off what is left in the root of the tear by little cuts, and leave the tear as it comes naturally; and never is the nail lifted up but by the thread, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin which remains after the cutting at the hair’s roots:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep so that the spatumile does not touch the flesh-cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in the oil a little cottonwool, and of the colier made of chalk, and leaves it until the next day; then cure it of what it needs until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle in, and the nails cannot enter, this appearance of nails by medicines is often cured; and they come to life as I have said in the division, and if you cover it, so that the oil of the disease comes out, and take the light-spun powder according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin at all and the root continues to press, then distil from your mouth into the oil of collyrium made of white lead and red collyrium and stop the oil until the next day; then begin the other work according to this method, until it is fully healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing stands in the way in the oil, as in an abscess, then take milk, and first heal the abscess as before until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin of the eye hurts in the oil by great damage, then suspend it with a string, and take off a little part of it, so that tears do not come; then distil into red oil which is made from white lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the horse that was born with a fist on its eye
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Of the horse that was born with a fist on its eye
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is completed and all the horse's hair has been removed, then put oil of rose or you have distilled it colier rouge and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put it on the oil defuer with a bunch of ewe's wool, so that it be well heated; and if it does not stop burning, and the horse without shoes climbs over you, and you doubt about heating, then let go of the oil and treat the aposteme with soothing medicines; then return to your ovraige as soon as it is healed, and in this way make the hair grow by using oil through this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But whatever the case, you must agree that you align the cure of each weak oil by the natural way; and of the accidental way, in ovraige of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these ovraiges until you see that the members are suffering from that ovraige.
des voines des eulz	of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	of the hairs that are covered with oil, and take care of their base and their root; it weakens the hair constantly. It is therefore necessary to make this first one: tell the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend the hairs completely according to his wisdom, and be careful to double them subtly according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two hair roots for every one according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then coiled the hair subtlety, and rinsed the blood every hour, until you see the roots of the hair removed from the oil; and be careful not to damage the oil with the tips of the combs, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be boiling in your oil if you have it; and when you have done so, let distil into the oil green and red wine to corrupt that which is delayed of the hair.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to bind all of this in that hour, then make a paste on oil of soothing things the pain of hairs, and leave it some days as long as the pain is soothed and is assured of an abscess warm, then begin again according to this method which is before as long as he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	the fistula so named "arissati": when you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said above, and it is not yet healed, then cut through the abscess at its base, where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then resect all of it with this instrument; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made from iron a 1/4 chief long, and be ground like a lime as in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place upon the head of the bone that is decayed, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand thereon a little while as you shall know that that decay is removed; and do this never so often, then restore the head to medicine that drys.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the leg is stiff and does not bend, and the cors of the bow is also stiff and remains so for ten days, and it does not open or suppurate, and evil happens to it, know that it is well; if not, there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula to light according to this form: and let you uncover the bone a second time by fire, and by medicines hot, and when it is uncovered thus take hold of it .i. forth according to this form, and be the iron joint at .iij. angles, and let the bow be flattened out so as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the bone in a hot water bath, and keep your hand away from the oil just a little while, then turn it completely around so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain through his hand; and then restore the head to medicine that dries, as I have taught you, and when the char is stiffened and hardened, so go the matter to the nose; if there is such a thing in the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hair is completely removed from the entire body, and there is no disturbance to the health, and there is no reduction, but it is necessary that you lay the sick person; then treat, then put vipers or a hat made of goat hair so as not to hurt him when sucking, then put on the oil. i.i. the oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocollo, and then strain the oil, and plaster it on bandages and drape; and the way the drape is that you squeeze the drape enough soft, and double each one in .iiij., and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the hair needs; then strain it by the side of a hard bandage forming, and restart the vipers so as not to hurt him; then remove the vipers and leave the strained oil day and night, and if the bonds are more loose, it is necessary that you strain them more; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the oil repair, it is good; if not; then restart the plastering and the drape and the bandage and the vipers until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the breaking of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then open, and comes as paper so like 1.i. resin grains, and is visible to see; therefore if you see it covered, the weaving is such that you pierce a needle at the root of the part near the edge up to there above, then pierce another needle where it has 1.i. double thread from the part of the hair; and let the first needle according to the disposition; then tie one end of the double thread and wrap one part of the cloth around it, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put the other oil wet with urine; and leave it as long as the thread rubs against the cloth, then cure the oil of comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never pierce the wound by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are of great appearance, so it is pierced with a sharp spatulum which comes perfectly from the oil, and chases away the moist white and dries up the hairs, and enters quickly; then extract them until they are well healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	with a sharp spatulum
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	with a sharp spatulum
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearance of needles in the division, and what it is appropriate to pierce; if according to health. It is appropriate that you set the patient between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind him with a healthy oil and tighten it very much; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand where the hairs are left, or on your right hand where the hairs are right; then take in your right hand, where the hairs are left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, where the hairs are right; then put the tip of the instrument at the crown by its thickness on a hair in that clear oil to the part of the smaller wound, then bottle the instrument called 'almagda' virtuously, and turn back your hand so that it pierces into the clear oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is appropriate that the measure of the way almagda be at the very top of the measure of the space that is from the plum to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the corked fabric, and then place the instrument up to the place where the hair is, then express one way after another. The hair now pierces, if he sees before him the patient and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, and then the hair rises again on the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not go up, pull almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in water a little thread of the gem, and leave that oil inside. Then place by side the oil that has been used or another dry one in oil rosin and in plenty of vinegar, and bind with healthy oil. We, and those who are from our time, let us put on common broiet with plenty of vinegar.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men who have too thick hairs, it is appropriate that you squeeze the instrument that is called 'alberit', of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then indeed the conjunctive altogether, and do not go too far in perfect way, but make 1. i. thin, then pour the almagest, as we said; and at completion of the work prepare for the patient 1. i. a sleeping coming, because he sleeps on his back in 1. j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and press light meats, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then let him go in that very same house most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then let him tie him until seven days; and it does not come but that you do this one at the hour of cure or after incision now, but it comes that you align this one, because what water rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then indeed the conjunctive altogether, and do not go too far in perfect way, but make 1. i. thin, then pour the almagest, as we said; and at completion of the work prepare for the patient 1. i. a sleeping coming, because he sleeps on his back in 1. j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and press light meats, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then let him go in that very same house most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then let him tie him until seven days; and it does not come but that you do this one at the hour of cure or after incision now, but it comes that you align this one, because what water rises rapidly.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then indeed the conjunctive altogether, and do not go too far in perfect way, but make 1. i. thin, then pour the almagest, as we said; and at completion of the work prepare for the patient 1. i. a sleeping coming, because he sleeps on his back in 1. j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and press light meats, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then let him go in that very same house most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then let him tie him until seven days; and it does not come but that you do this one at the hour of cure or after incision now, but it comes that you align this one, because what water rises rapidly.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the almagest, so that those who do not know them may see them; and they are properly of air.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the chief of these middle subtle qualities be in the back in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of fire on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	And no one is born with these various ajusted fires, of which there are some that seem scorpions at the mouth of a pie; and if there are any such as have fire color, then let it be fire color. In this case, in those characers that are souef and not enchancred, you should make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and put on these chars with a sharp knife; then take what you please from the subtile ajusted fire on one side, until you know that this char is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose bleeds and moisture comes out to the palate, know that he is well; and if the moisture perforates as it should, know that there is a nail in the bone above, so the instrument does not cut: therefore you should put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and tie it with both hands, and leave a space between each knot of about an inch or less; and put the thread into the nose at the power of the patient, and draw it out smelling it often, so that it goes into the mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the nostril that comes out by the thread with one hand, and the other nostril that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and feel them alternately while smelling as we do; put back the thread so often as you feel the knot, and make it tight; and leave the nose a caine of plunk some days until he is well, and if he needs dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purifying the nostril, by which oil and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a cord, and thus you conduct it; and if you see, make a closed cord, and let the instrument rest on the nose while oil or any liquid is heated.
de la char sor le neis	of the wound on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Might often occur in the neck wound a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, so that it is visible to the eye; and for this it is necessary that you chop the head at the beginning, and burn the bone all over, then put fire on it; and if you delay to chop it as long as it is great, if it is hard, of a strange color, and poor in feeling: but do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when you chop it once, much evil comes to the sick person; and this abscess is of soft touching, not of strange color, and you see that you can cut it all over, if you empty the patient and chop him without fear, and cure him with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck wound has been chopped and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	when the neck wound has been chopped and cured
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitch is that you gather together the solution: or with needles, as we said in sewing the stomach; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	of the lips Apoplexy comes into the lips, resembling grain times, and smaller and greater; then you should turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and hold it with pliers and shape it in each part; then employ the vitriol broach after the incision of vitriol, as much as the wound is dried up; and then let it rest.
de la char des gencives	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent "albulus"; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l'incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.
des sordens	Here is the translation of the text into English:
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	"Now, regarding the teeth, they are not put together at the top of the mouth, between the gums, with sharp tools that are ugly and rough; and the teeth are not black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption does not come to the gum, and they are stinky; if it seems to you that you should hold it between your hands, and its roots are in your hand, and you rip out the teeth or sharp tools with them, as long as it does not stay for a moment; and thus do you make black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are clean; and if one is torn at the first cutting, it is good; but if not, if it begins again on the second day and third, until you have ripped them all out; and know that teeth require different shapes of tools to rip out, according to what the work requires, for the razor with which you rip out the teeth has other shapes than the one with which you rip out between the teeth; and these forms and others are ready for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain that you pull it as soon as you can, because this should not be done at all; for it is a highly putrid substance until such time as there is no excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Now when the patient is forced to pull, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that needs pulling. Many times the pain leaves the patient, and he believes that the tooth is sound, and has it pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not leave him, because we have already tried this with these gentlemen; and when you are certain of the tooth that needs pulling, then you scratch around the tooth with a sharp instrument very carefully from one side to the other; then you hold it with your fingers or small pliers at the first hole and hole, until they are well loosened, then you tighten the pliers firmly; and be the patient's jaw between your knees, and keep it firm so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Then pull the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take any of these instruments and push it inside from each side slightly, and move it so as you did first. And if the root is broken and bleeding, then fill it with rags, where the break is; and if it is carefully extracted with pliers, so that it does not break when extracted; and it is necessary to cut the gum very carefully around the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and remain with the patient because of the root's greater pain from the first. And do well that you do not do as does that ignorant doctor, who by his haste and boldness sometimes breaks the carriage, and never provides anything but what we have told; but brings sometimes by the question of that great disease for the roots that it delays, or for the carriage that it breaks, as we have often wanted to do; and when the tooth is pulled, if you wash the root with wine or mint or vinegar; and if they run away from the pain that usually comes, if sometimes a little vitriol is applied; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, so that they do not break the first tooth, are long in length and large in diameter, so that they do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when you pull, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in place while pulling, if you put cotton or oil on the jaw where it hurts, as long as the roots are smooth, then the pliers that are called "algefri" seem to fit; and let them be shaped like a file:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out to all these clutches, it is convenient that you uncover the cart entirely around the root, and put the instrument which is called "al-thalī'ah", that is to say palanquin, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be far and wide so that it does not break, and the root jumps over this, it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help yourself with this instrument that has .ij. rains, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front in the rationale of dens, and of this instrument which seems like a great claw, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Et soit ciste instrument estruite du fait qu'il ne puisse briser, et sache que beaucoup d'instruments de profondeur sont; et aussi d'autres instruments, qui ne sont pas comptés; et les maîtres sages forgent par eux-mêmes leur instrument, selon ce que leurs œuvres et la maladie lui montrent, car il y a de nombreuses maladies où l'ancien n'enseigne pas d'instrument pour la diversité des choses, et si on ne brise point le charriot ou les autres os sur lesquels il est posé, s'il cherche les instruments qu'il convient, que je t'ai dit, et t'aide par des gestes, de coi voici la forme:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Et soient gros et bien tenant pour tenir l'os, qu'il n'échappe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis retourne le à la place de médicaments convenant à ceu, et s'il y a en l'os putréfaction, et elle est petite, si la re-insersion a tout cet instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	Quant la dent apparaît ne mie selon le corps naturel, et la forme est laide, et surtout en femmes pucelles, si convient que tu saches si le dent est né après la mort du dent, et n'est pas dans sa place, et on ne peut le soigner ni le limer: alors le raie; et s'il est arraché avec le dent, si prends cet instrument dont ci est la forme, et est semblable à un petit bec, et soit de fer forgé en haut:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And so the cap is put on and off day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and for this reason you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be limed, then liming should be done like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And also it is like this that the lime is made from which they make needles; and gradually the tooth is limed as the hands are taken off lightly, so that it does not move until it has been chiseled; then the plane at the end to any razor, and the edge is too trenchant and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to lime the sharpness gradually until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loosened
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when the tooth is loosened, either by percussion or by pulling, and the patient cannot press on what he chews so that he does not chuckle; and you have cured him with restraining medicines, and that doesn't work; then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never moves; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain in one tooth, take the file and double it over between two teeth on either side of that tooth, then place the caps between the teeth, if there are more than one, until you get to a healthy tooth on the other side; then start the covering again up to the part where you started, and gently tighten your grip with pliers so that it does not move; and if the wire slips, or the thread rubs, then tighten it with another wire. Then the caps are put together with pliers, and they are tightened, and placed between the healthy tooth and the file, and left like this until it tightens; and if it tightens and serves for a while, and stays like this as long as it can, and if it slips or rubs, then tighten it with another wire; if it stays and serves for a long time, and that is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the tightening of the 20 caps, if you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose, if one puts it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not skilled and chịuing, and never make the shape of a tooth of a cow's, and put it back in its place where it has fallen out, and hold it fast, as we have said, and delay and maintain it for such a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To take away the metal from around the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No one should take away the metal from around the tongue or nature it, except in such a way that you open the mouth of the sick person and place your head on his chest, and take the tongue out; then take off the nerves from the large side, as long as the tongue is separated from its place, and whether it is hard or not, and it is the sudden pain of injury; then bind it with a bandage and keep it wet with rose water or cold water, and then put a piece of linen on it; and dip it every night, so that the leech will not stick. And if the wound heals, then apply fire to the skin with vitriol, which is good for this; then cure it with other remedies until it is healthy,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see red or black or hard color on it, so that the sick person does not feel it or touch it, for this is cancer; and if it goes down to blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour the wine, and let it sit for a moment, and deliver it with a thin blade, and cut both sides; and if it comes to your work, so put it on vitriol until it is stained, and return to your work until you take away all of it; then take away the water of the sea and the salt, and cure it with other remedies until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	of the throat abscesses come out from within, which are called "godath", and they are called by name properly "amandres", and when you cure them, if as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is an abscess that is small in size and has a thin color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron either for fear of bleeding; but leave it alone until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a pale color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it over, but first take care that the abscess is hot and at rest. Then set the patient in front of the sun, and let his teeth be in good order, and he opens his mouth and places his fingers between his hands, and presses his tongue against all the instrument, so that this is the shape; and it should be silver or thin gold as our knives are:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the knife and put it in the amandre, and pull it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with a thread before covering the instrument, otherwise the shape is good, which seems like a bunch of forces; and yet the head is curved, and one side is above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron from this or that:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then take it with pliers, so that this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be careful on one side and the other; and when you have copped one of the mandorles, if you cop the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and strong and easily, and they remove blood as it comes, if gargariate the patient with water, or juices of cooked pomegranates, or leaves of mirto, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure him as long as he is healthy; and never come to the throat other apostemes than the .ij. mandorles, if they are copped in this way just like the .ij. mandorles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman for an apoplexy that was lying in her throat, that is to say, one apoplexy of small size; and I had so well sealed up all the throat, that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for 1 day or 2 days. The apoplexy was so high that it had risen 2 inches by the 2 passages where the blood came out. I hastened then, and inserted an onyx into one of the passages, then drew it out, and pushed a lot of bowels; then refitted the other in the other passage where the blood came out, and pressed her tongue; after I inserted the onyx into these apoplexes, and copped part of them, and only let out a little blood; so the passage in the throat was unstopped for the woman, and she began to drink water and wine again, and did not cease to cut off that apoplexy with an onyx for a long time; and that apoplexy came back again, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it became very big; so I engorged it and cauterized it in her throat: then it stood still without growing any bigger; and I left these parts, and there was nothing but God did after me.
de l’uve	of wine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the head is re-attached to the body, and it is far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called an "eye". When it has been treated as described in the previous section on treatment, and the cure does not work, and you see that the abscess aphesized, and it is thin, then you should cut it out; and if it is round and not too far away, and it is red or brown or black, then you should avoid the incision. For there is great danger in this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have described, that its blenchor and longness, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument that we have described above; then cut out the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more than this, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of two mandrels, and cure it until it is well. And if the patient has a fear of being covered, then you should use cauterization with an instrument that causes pain; and the manner of cauterization is sharp fire. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then he presses his tongue to the instrument that we have described for cauterization, and confuses it with sharp fire so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which comes its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put your hand under his head so that he can put the medicine, as if with a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that he spits and swallows the medicine into himself, so that it does not go down the throat and wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, until you see it calm and the medicine has stopped hurting; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton dries out; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash after 2-3 days. And if you need to clean the medicine from the cauterization, and it is cleaned, and after cleaning the medicine, let him drink cold water and gargle as much as he can until he is well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than the incision, or the cauterization; if it has been cured by smoking in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and averron and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them into a 1-liter pot, and pour water on them easily, and boil it; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and put the pot on this instrument that has been described in this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And be of silver or gold, and be one of the shoulders crushed in the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the vein through the cannula, as long as the vein is deadened; then begin again often, as long as the vein dries up, and guard against doing this at the beginning of the advent of the abscess, for many things have happened there; and do not make this but at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cannula and put it in the head of the shoulder a hook of tar, so that the mouth of the sick person does not get too hot; because the hook of tar does not add to the vapor that presses on the mouth, and this is good all together and saves.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it rises in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so that it is convenient that you should take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is convenient that you should make the sick person vomit in such a way that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it should throw up; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1c. morcel of dry bread; and he licks the sponge with a thread, and then swallows her; and when she comes to the point, if she grieves, and then pull hard; and if she does not come out of this thing that we have said, take a plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and raise the head higher; and guard against touching the epiglottis, that it does not come down, nor push the bone in; and move that the sick person swallows the instrument, for what he swallows or what is thrown up; if she drinks it, or she pulls it all the way out, equally as far as she can.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	de la sang de la gorge
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not spit as described above, then submerge the patient in an asafetida solution, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the uvula; do this many times, for she will cough up phlegm. And the method of the fumigation is that you should squeeze the pot containing the charred herbs into a covering cloth placed over the fire, and onto the pot put the head of the instrument; then pour the smoke onto it, and the patient puts the tip of the nose into his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but comes to the blood; and the blood will then come out, and if it does not spit, then start again with this method; make the patient thirsty, and give him salt and sour things to eat, and do not give him any water to drink; and then let the medicine act according to my instructions.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument, as I mentioned above, is such that it can be seen to treat the blood; it has the appearance of a corbed awl for entering into the throat; and it resembles a stethoscope; and there is lime-like sharpness on its tip, so that whatever it touches, it cannot leave; and see this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the capitules of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The capitules of the abscesses are, according to this reminder which comes from one and another in this book, and are diverse in perforation and in incision; and it is in .ij. ways, whereof one is in its own appearance, and of what he holds moisture. And the second way is for the lees where they are at the core. For the abscess at the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the charnel is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the bow is dead according to its fulfillment; and if to such that it comes when they are crusted, and do not die according to their fulfillment, so that it hurts the principal member; or it is of the principal member, and if you delay the piercing as long as he is dead, it will hurt the principal member; or it is of the base, if one pierces it in this way that he is dead; and it does not come that you pierce the crusted abscess before the digestion is complete, lest that which is of the base should rot to perfection, and be alongied inside, and come out as a fistula; and can not heal in great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is calm, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the debate and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the piercing where it is most dependent the member of the abscess, and at what place he opens; and let the piercing be of the long side of the core, and if the abscess is to the hands or to the feet, or in joints and nerves and blood vessels, and in all its sides equal, or there is no pliedure.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases of vomiting, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in a state of pus, let it be left open until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, your body will be elongated by its outlet, and it will be full of filth; and perhaps its lips will harden and its depth will become more difficult. And if there is an abscess that has pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where cure should be made, and covered up; when they have been completely cured like drapels, and softened, it is necessary to do so as one does with blisters: and if there are any that have split into three angles, and there are any that one covers like a mirth leaf, as in abscesses of the limbs; and if there are any that you make a round size, and other sizes and appear to be covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those who do not have a crest, if it is an superficial abscess, you should pierce it clearly; and when the abscess is large, and has a deep bowels, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the bowels out at once, but draw some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing more; do this many times from little to little, until the bowels are all drawn out; unless the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old honourable people. For the expectoration will jump out of the bowel sometimes with great force, and perhaps the patient will die, and you will not know it. Therefore, use this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you find the wound to be small, and if it is a plain cut, put linen or old cotton in it; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes, you should put a tent in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have covered part of the skin with the abscess, and you have wrapped it around, you should fill it with old cotton or wool of flax without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then open it, and treat it with ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood that runs from your work comes to you, bring cold water and a small cloth, and moisten 1. drapel, and put it on the place where the blood is running by many times. And if the blood persevere, bring government and medicine, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is or tears of an animal, and the leus where the abscess is very nervous, you should put on tents and drapelz moisten with wine and oil warm; and if it is in esteit, and the leus is charnus, you should put on drapelz moisten with water and oil, or with wine and oil cold, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and wash it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is something that is universally known in the treatment of abscesses: however, I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
des soros	abscesses
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	"And this is something that is universally known in the treatment of abscesses: however, I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and here is the paste."
des scrophules	of the scrofulous
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Of the scrofulous many times have I seen an abscess at the neck, and drain the abscesses, and inflammation, and no other place go, and are moistened, and grow together one with another. And each scrofula is properly within its rib, as the knot and the abscess of the throat, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not wish to obey health. In that case when you see that it is of good disposition in the chest, and seems the color of the flesh, and mute from each part and is not at all arousable from the neck nor the artery nor the conduit, and is not at all profound; then it is necessary that you chop it above, and scorch it from each part, and there are the .ij. lips of the chest on one side, if you need them, as we have said in regard to the abscess of the throat; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not chop the nerve nor the vein, and do not be too deep, lest you should make the main vessel escape, and do not see it too far ahead, lest you should chop too much.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you chop the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to finish, then put vinegar broil on the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and extract the wound; and leave the wound until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the scrofula is hardened in its root, if it is necessary that you chop it at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with wool dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you chop the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you gather the 2 lips of the wound and sew them now, then that there is no delay because of the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary that you understand to chop the root of it, and draw it forcefully, and sew it as we have said before. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens die; and pierce it by cutting, then i introduce tendres with oignement and semblance things, so that it corrupts he who is delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well washed, if it is healthy.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the lengthening of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the fending of the throat, which is called "epiglottis", be removed; and no aid should be sought from anyone, since all the veins and the pella of the disease are found in the mouth or the throat or in the.ij. Mandres".
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pella, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the obstruction that comes from strangulation does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a double curve or a small slit from one side to the other, between the two curves or by the quantity of the slit in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if these are suitable for the splitting of the epiglottis there is no charnel, and the vessel is long from one end to the other.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its full length, and splits it so that it comes out at the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, because you will see nothing, and then cut the cartilage as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the splitting of the vein of the chin that goes out through the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed when one doubts about strangulation, gather together the .ij. lips of the wound from the end, and the flesh all along the cartilage; then administer medicines that bring about the birth of blood, until it is well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuças says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of air makes him die.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from dying; and
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and so the elder should command that the wound remain open until the disease has passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iiij.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they should command to stitch the wound and heal, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw;
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a damsel take a knife, and put it in her throat, and run into the forest by the porch;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to cure her, and I found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and I knew that she had not cut a vein but rather that the blood had flowed from her throat, and the source of the flow was through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and stitched up the wound, and cured it as best I could so that she would be healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the young woman was only red in her cheeks, and returned to her normal state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For by God's life, I hope that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	are called "gastric hernias", and are large hernias in color of a yellow, and are very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and they are according to two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no machine.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And this accident happens in two ways, one is like grass growing outside us, and the other way is like an abscess coming from us due to blood.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it has fear, and does not come to operate fire only in that which is little, and tries and searches in all the intermeshing:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you prove it as well as grass, and cannot do anything, if it copes, as we cope us, and try it to all its hair, if there is any left:
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everything, and treat if it is necessary, so that it is completely healthy.
des nous	Of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Several ways of doing this exist, all of which I will describe;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and so that I may show the entire difference between them;
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the issue is hot and feverish, until the泡泡消去，并且取得了成功；然后发烧和发热就消失了。
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no heat or fever or pain, and contains.i. the medicine that is his own sack and is according to the color of the body, and also begins like a bean, and becomes thick;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of their colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the cure of the new birth, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entreμισsoires", according to what their form will be or the paste that is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way of the investigation of abscesses is that you squeeze or more moist water than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the pus, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then pull out the intruder, and take care that it does not hurt.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If it runs with moisture, let its color be like that of the others I have spoken of in the abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the intruder there is no moisture, know that it is greasy, so do it in a cross form and take it by the pinches, and burn it lightly on each side, and beware of the cost where it lies, so you get it healthy with the nut.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it healthy, then pull it by pieces so that nothing remains standing.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if I do not delay, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little time, and does not cause you any pain, then employ some corrosive water pouder on the wound, extract the wound, and put something soothing on the abscess, and heal with other remedies until it is well;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if we cut open the wound with .ij. fingers, and heal with what causes a fever;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound is opposite or another side, and do not delay using lead vitriol, and let it rest for 2 days or 3, as long as the wound smells bad, and then return to where it was delayed;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See the forms of instruments that are inserted, and they are of 3 ways: big and small and very small; and there are 3 quarters which are called "albaret", and 1 which is called "breb", and there are 3 ways: big, small, and very small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorrows, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven to sink into black clay to encircle the corbicles of fistula;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of 3 ways: big, small, and very small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the apertures.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the instruments are of many appearances, so that you see here: big, small, and very small; and if there are any which have 3 quarters of 3 ways;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if they are once who have .iij. combs, and also of .iij. ways; and if they are once who have .ij. combs, and once of a comb alone, and are of .iij. ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these should be sharp, and of such I have who do not cut better than from one side, so that we skin them in order to get at the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introducers are the needles inserted many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of 3 ways: great, small, and mean, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and don't use it in a wet place, like legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never use it for anything else than for the skin, according to this shape, so that one does not burn oneself:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and never place it in a place that heals quickly by opening veins and arteries, or in any other large area:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and never inflame the breasts of certain men when they are becoming corrupted, as long as they look like a woman's breasts:
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they stay lame and swollen, and if one should follow this method as written in this chapter of B, up to:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scald the fat and employ medicine to the wound with charcoal, then join the 19. lips of the wound together by stitching, and heal it until it is well;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if one drinks the liquid, it is softened by its greatness just like a woman's milk is softened, and if one makes it in 19. stitches on top, by 19. similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line B up to line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and add what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely done, so that the patient does not rest, or for the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton made from a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it sit until the remaining fat and juice are cooked, then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	the abscesses of the wrists
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The sores that come from abscesses are handled like hard scrofula or if they have ribs and contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B onwards up to line G.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all of the bowels in the abscess are empty, if one employs wet cotton and leaves it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scars of leprosy, then treat it in the same way as we have described for treating leprosy wounds; and if the bowels break open, apply fire cautery as we have described.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the flesh above it is tightly closed, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with the escaped vein and the abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows when it is for the artery, then the abscess is long enough to complete itself.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel an exit; and when it is for the vein, if it is difficult to go out.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cut this abscess, and most of all when it has broken the joints and the armpits and where the collar is wet with other fluids, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	So then it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, cut through the skin from above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate on the waist as one would on a horse, and separate the artery from the tissue carefully, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then bottle the blood, and make it pierce up to the other side of the waist, and stretch out the artery with a double thread in iij. inches, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the iij. arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	and then mark the place that is between the 17th and 18th links of an introducer while there is a snot coming out from it, and separate the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then arrange the care that causes fever, as long as the link bleeds;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat what is infected with what is good for it, as long as it heals;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then have the patient hold it with his hand as soon as possible after cutting all the skin around it;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then pour the ink into the tube that you hold in your hand, and let it flow out, and there is a thread of .i. two, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	and then incise it, as I have said to you, or join of one of the two parts to the other thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle into all of the thread at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in three lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	and then cut off the excess of the thread as it comes out, and cut off the excess of the knot and leave what is tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then wet it with wine and oil, then administer cures for tent and ointments until he is well.
des apostemes des ners	the abscesses of the nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when the abscesses come out in the artery and the vein, they come out as nails when they are torn, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the shoulder joints and the two arms, and in all their joints, and it has the color of the heart's color, and is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely set, but let them rest;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and be quiet on all sides, and not move forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in joints does not come to cover with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or front, make the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the appendix is small, if it has a nail, and cut it at the root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is great, then suspend him by the foot, and scorch him, then the bone and join the wound to the seam, and treat it until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large mouths hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No times comes in bellies and not any other part thelul, and is a disease called "fungus" by appearance of corn, and is the root subtlez, and the tree big; and there are little and great many
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw. i. home who had. iij. bellies which were more like to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a little root, and were cut short, and ran together moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found one weighing .xviij. oz., and the other .vj. oz., and the preparations in the incision so that if you look at the patient, he is moist, and the color of the arthroplasty is white and moist and of fine roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if the chisel is too wide, and are in your presence the fire cautery. For the tailor often causes too great a loss of blood, and goes away without you, so hurry up then the cauterizer;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient spoiling and fearful of the incision of iron, then take .i. thread of linen well made, and bind the arthroplasty as we have said, and leave it for .ij. days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the linen thread as long as it copes the arthroplasty, and test by him work; and if the roots are thick, so have fear at the coping directly for the belly, but you please well copes the half,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	and then cauterize it so that it does not come back; and then cure the wound, and keep you do not cover the thistle which is of fuchsia color and poor smell and milk sour.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the cure for chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the heat is gone
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	As soon as the heat subsides, apply fire cautery to the wound or split of syphi, which is on the belly and has some bouez, just as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the skin and the outlet of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then there are many different ones, and when it is pressed to its two sides it returns again, and sometimes if it is bound, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and from much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then open according to the signs of the large and hard abscesses, and fix it in place.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is by wind, then it is smoke at the temple, and the work is that you observe its appearance: whether it is blood from an artery, a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, if I have told you about the chapter of the abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his bowels up and be extended on both sides, then sign all around the bowel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct him to cut softly between your hands;
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go inside the place that you have signed with all the spatula;
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then cut off half of the anus, to all of the large hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then fasten it with a strong thread or with a strong silk rope tightly, and let us fix it securely;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then stretch out half of the anus on the thread, and with your thumb, push down the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the thread, if it comes loose, push the intestine towards the anus;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it to the edge, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery is blocked or cut, take it to the edge and go inside loudly, then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and tie them with .ii. threads, and tie the .ii. needles around what you have cut so that you have made a hole;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess over the needles, and if you see, take out the needles, and let it remain in its place until it putsrefies, and cut off the dead part by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or cut when it is soft and putrid, then treat what it touches, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And draw out the blood where you find moisture, then treat the affected area accordingly, and bind it.
dou chancre	and the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of the appearances of ulceration, and how it should be operated on with medicines, and how one should cauterize it; and we say that ulceration begins in the genitals, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the old man said that when ulceration is in a place where it can be cut as ulceration is in breasts, and in the cunt, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is at its beginning; and when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never seen one healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the amputations, when they can be cut as we have said, are that you do not purge any black urine at all times; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then afaite the urine  .i. a good place for amputation; then pour your swages or ulceration, and your hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the juice at your hand or at any thing, and if it recedes from the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	about hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	about hydrops
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	about hydrops
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	about hydrops
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and draw your hand back from all the sputum between the skin and the leech as if you were stretching out an inch or so; then pierce the leech as far as the sputum comes to a clear point, and this is the channel of the water, then draw it tight, and bottle up this instrument, for this is its shape: And it resembles an iron wire of fine silver, and is of bronze or brass, and has in one part  .i. little hole; and on one side there are .iii. holes, and on the other side .ii., and on the other side .i.; and the head is cut off like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision where the writers make the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, he should now pour it on the instrument; empty half or one-third of it, because if you empty more than that at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will turn away from death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its pulsations mean, then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the pulse which is on the leech, of which I have spoken, that you pierce it according to this way; then recommence the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and treat with a little quantity of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.
de l’estopement de la verge	for the stopping of sperm
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	For the stopping of sperm: No child is born without an issue in the member, or if it is small, or if it is not in its place. If it is necessary that it should pierce at all times. I will put a very small cap of lead according to this form; then bind and keep it there for two or three days, until he has urine, and then remove it; and perhaps he will never know it, because the strong urine that comes does not leave his close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	For the stopping of sperm: If the issue is small, then bind it with a cap of lead, as we have said, if it should become larger. If they do not have the issue in its place, they are blighted, because no one is born who has the issue at the top of the member, since they cannot urinate until their member rises; and they cannot conceive by anything that the material does not come up to the navel, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this chapter is that the patient lie down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are to be cut off as if they were the thickness of a feather, so that the foreskin can fit in between them; and you must guard against bloodletting which often comes with it, and if it does come, stop the bleeding from that part and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	часто возникают язвенные высыпания на пенисе, и это вызывает неприятный вид; и есть добрые и плохие; поэтому ты должен взять их с помощью тонкого иголочки, и очистить их и обработать мазью диафохинтоном до тех пор, пока они не заживут.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wart is malignant, of black color and putrid, then you should bring it with a needle; when you have cleansed it, and if the wart is inside the skin, take out the wart that is inside first; and when it is sewed up, then cut off the wart. For when you cut it together, if it is not well closed at the head of the penis, it will become black and rotten there and in its place; therefore you should burn out all that is black and rotten, and then put honey and flour on it which is made from pomegranate skin and roots, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the pain of prostration comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries so help in all 24 dispositions together: that is to say, in the prostration of pain and corruption; and if the testicles are corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you pierce or conduct from the penis a rope of plangent, and urinate the patient among; and when the hair is shaven at the head of the penis which has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary that you scald with 1 instrument as needed, until the ligaments are relaxed and the penis is free from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if this is a difficult thing to devise, then it is necessary that you scald with one instrument the tip of the penis and the skin; then separate them well between 24, and I put 1 thin linen cloth wet in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not dislocation if it is done with the will and properly on children; However, if we do this operation with our will and properly on children, it is necessary that we do it as well and as lightly as possible for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have heard the most part of the masters and the wise men who made circumcision there, and the forces, and all a novacule; so was the cause because it has 1.ij. threads, and by chance if one should come on that above and hold it back that way.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or if it is covered up again, and the pain is double, and the washing that is done there from the heel is not assured; and the nail by chance escapes the cut, and spoils the work, and often born like this so that there is no need for washing, and I have heard.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	For the washing that is done with all the threads I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above as well as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Car when you press your hand, if it is all even in length and size; but the string should be well woven around the skin; and the way of the first work is that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not tie the string too tightly around the rod, and then put him to sleep in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then hold it straight between your hands, and stretch the strings between your hands or untie your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or press, and turn it upside down as long as the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated on it, then tie the joint with a double rope, then untie one of the ropes to another; and hold it by the second loop at the knuckle and little finger, and pass between the two ropes, then lift the press gently above your chest, and turn the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let it run and run, for that is the healing; and put powder on top of the powder. i. a cloth dampened with a mixture of cooked yeast, mixed with good rose oil and honey, and leave it until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for cleaning is this: the two strings should be loose and should be cut, and the strings should also be even in length.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the purification if it is when the coursed [blood] flees from the incision; so it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, in such way that the lews make an aposteme; and make it equal, and if you can not hold it in your fingernail, you take it with pliers, and then you cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it surpass three days, and that which is dislocated from the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the aposteme of the sore is calm, and the skin is lightly scorched; if you cut it as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retenement de l’urine si est quand li puet pas uriner a l’ouer; donques il covient que tu le soives en ton ungle, ainsois que li leus ne fasse point de mal; si le puet uriner, se li estraint la urine jusqu’a qu’il soit purifié.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retained urine is due to a stone in the bladder, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or chaff, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not passing, and you see the retention due to the stone which is stuck or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his knees; and let him put the stone up against his back, and extend his abdomen from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he can lie down as well as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder to express the stone from above, so that the urine is passed.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a 'syringe', which has this shape: and it should be made of fine light silver, like the feathers of an owl; and the tube should be a palm long and half wide, and it should be sharp at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way to express the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the tip; and dip the end of the thread in wool or cotton, and pour the wool or cotton into the syringe; and dip the excess of the wool or cotton back into the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and some olive oil; and have the patient sit down, and lift up the bladder and the cervix with oiled fingers and oil from olives and water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then lightly put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis above the boude; then pour out the syringe up to the bladder, and let the urine flow into the thing that is empty, and this is not done according to this order but because this one who leads or where she goes is twisted; then are the thread through all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out, and make it run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and start again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and keep the patient calm.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or sores come in the bladder, or rust is gathered, and you there see distilling water and medicine, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are 11.10 perforations: 9 from one side, and 1 from the other, as you see; and let his hair grow by reason that the medicinal poultice may be such that it stops well the head without addition, if we can remove the moisture, and throw when the need is there.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the poultice in the moisture, and throw it while trailing which is there; if you will remove the moisture to the poultice, and then rebouwt firmly the trailing; if it will enter the moisture within, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	This is the form of the subtle clot which one uses to clot the bladder: if so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or of archil, and it is the chief higher; and take 1.4 sheep bladders or the 1.4 bladders of the fish, then put the moisture in which you see to clot the bladder, then lie between the 1.4 bladders made of a good double thread of yarn, and heat the moisture on the fire; then bottle the head of the clot in the bladder, then squeeze your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make it .i. into a circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put in there a strong thread, then join the circle together as one would join a .i. dal, and place inside oil and moisture and water, and fasten it onto the instrument; and do so with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods for cutting and extracting stones together with medicines; and I have spoken about the difference between a stone that is hard and the signs of it, and how to size a stone; and regarding the bladder and the penis; and I will now explain this clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is hard in the bladder often comes more frequently in children, and this is a sign that water jumps from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and if it becomes hard, and grates the bladder, and jumps many times, then it softens; and the foundations are light; and this is lighter for young people until they are .iij. years old, and heavier for the elderly, and between middle age and old age it is moderate, and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to cleanse the disease with a douche, to extract all the matter that is in the intestines. For it is not often that it is necessary to go looking for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and turn him upside down and move him gently so that the stone comes out perfectly from the bladder, and never go up from its place; then make it sit between your hands, and let his legs be dislocated so that the bladder hangs down; then examine and feel inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in space, then quickly cut it with your left index finger; if the disease is old, or the patient is young and healthy, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, and press down on the base of the stone, and feel for the stone at your thumb, and if you feel a knot at the neck of the bladder, then press hard on your thumb; and squeeze it towards the outside and feel for the stone, and if you feel it with your finger, then cut off the neck of the bladder.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to extend the testicles in his right hand above, and with his left hand lift up the skin that is dislocated from the testicles in the part where the cutting takes place; then dip the spatulum in it, for this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And put between him who is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the cost of the left knee; and let it be right on the stone, and your two are joined to the foundation, and let his size be large by defect, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	in order that the press between him who is or foundation, may not be without work; and know that there is part of stone where there are angles and edges: so it is easier to pull out; and if there is part which is like a ball, round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	so as to make the size larger where there are angles and edges; and if it does not come out, then you must use pliers which are like a file on the head, so that you can pull out the stone without damaging it; or you will strike with an axe at the base; and if you cannot catch it so, then increase the hole little by little, and if it is not corroded, then use vitriolic acid.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, first strike the largest at the neck of the bladder, then chop and grind, and the smaller ones after, if there are any more. And if it is very large, so it should be, and make a large wound. For 20 things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out all at once because his bladder cannot hold it; but you must try to pull it out, or cut it into pieces with pliers, until you take it all out;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, if you employ the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood and the poultice, and put it on  .i. a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess; then remove the patient from his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if you raise it well with oil and water, then treat it with astringent ointment and balsamic ointment until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corroding of blood in the bladder, and because of this it is urinated without salt with urine: then put your medicine on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and it will ooze.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And then raise the wound with water and salt and seaweeds, and assist it in all ways that you know how to make healthy; and it is necessary that, for every urination, you bind his two legs together, and put the medicines on top of each other.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it lies in the canal of the urethra, and is pushed in, and urine cannot come out; then the cure for this that I have just described, that you cut it many times, is excised from the size with this cure. I have already tested this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take 1.5 feet of iron according to this shape and be 1.5 inches long:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	And then take 1.5 feet of wire and place it behind the stone in the penis, so that it cannot come out at the bladder; then insert the bit into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the bit back onto your hand with a poke and a poke, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if [then] comes the urine soon, then press your hand on this one who is held in the penis which is behind; if it is broken then, and jumps away with the urine, and the patient is relieved,
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this in any other way so that it is harmed, then take 1.5 feet of wire behind the stone and 1.5 inches on top, then pass the bit between the 2 lines, then extract it strongly, and desole the line, and clean the frozen blood which is in the wound; and treat as long as it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is possible that stone occurs in women, and if it has never happened before, there is a great cure [for it], and is defended by 2 things: one is that per adventure the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who recognizes herself to the mirrors, even if she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more perfectly formed than the man's, because it covers making an even deeper cut, and causes great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to send someone, per adventure it is necessary that you send a woman well-versed, and do not cut her, and if you do not find one, ask no more. There is also a presentable woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to make the man that you command in the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and carefully examine whether the woman is a virgin: then it is appropriate to put his hand or foot and seek the stone; and if she has true, so bind her hand, and recommend that she puts her hand or with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder shape.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she has true, so it is appropriate that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder all the way to the root, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then he should put his hand on the stone in the middle of the leg, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her hand above the stone or remove it, and cut a little first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then he should put the rope in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rain. If you know the appearances so that you can judge the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not go out, put vitriolic vinegar in it, and hold it for an hour until the sin is stained; then return to your work, until the stone is gone, and have tools that I told you in the extraction of the stone to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if you have left it without treatment, and that is the artery which has been cut, then put the powder on the spot and draw out the blood and fat, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone in place and do not extract it, so that the patient might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has abated, and the place is ready, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	is made from water or white milk that is mixed with the seed of the fig tree, which is contained in the yolk of the egg; and is called "syfac", and is never properly in the fabric of the egg itself, if we consider this to be a different egg; and the skin of the fig tree between the white milk that we have mentioned; and that one does not come out.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the offspring of this rat is so feeble that it comes out deformed, and this material spreads.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is also moisture that comes from beating on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of trouble, for if it is white as we have said, it is the rears of an apple, and does not open the joints, for there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper towre, then are the rears of an apple with a part of the egg, and for this one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphos, so it smells bad; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, try it on all the internal parts because its form is in front.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, which comes after the internal parts, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and cover him with sheets.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs between the cheeks.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatule and scrape the skin of the cow among its long until its knuckle, and make your cut all straight by splitting the skin of the cow until its white fat, and peel it carefully according to the time.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the fat plain of water at 1/4 inch large hole, and take out all the water, and then put your onions, and keep the fat up; and do not touch the skin of the cow, but peel it only; cut him up all or in pieces separately the cost of it finely, so that if you don't cut it well, the water will come back;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood comes to your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished working on the fat; and assemble the 21 pieces of cow's skin into one piece, then treat it like the other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the blood is corrupted by some disease, then it is necessary that you hang the suspenders in doubt of the decay of blood; then cut off the cow' skin from all the suspenders, and take out the fat, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled into .ij. parts together, know that these are .ij. branches; then put the other part together as you did the first evenly, then wash the blood, and put into the wound another moistened with oil and rosewater.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put elsewhere another moistened with wine and oil, and put on the 2 branches, and put over them double linen, and bind up all the linen according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take 2 linen cloths, and fill them with shredded linen according to this form, and sew them into the girdle of the tunic, and let one end of the cloth hang down to the back, and the other to the shoulder; and let the other chief rest on the 2 angles, and let all the restraint be sewn into the loop of the tunic;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and there is no medicine of this ramice of cautery in the shape of a blade of iron, and it is that you compress 1. cautery needle finely, and cope the skin of the branches, and be heated as we have said, so that the white substance that contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you use this method of cauterization, pierce those parts with a sharp instrument, and burn them with this subtle fire.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut all of it as well as you can, so that you remove everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the flesh; and know that this work is safer; and avoid the loss of blood and the harm of cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or a loss of blood or another thing, then treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	and if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then apply piercing, as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain, by the meanings that we have said, that the root-water is present,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If you make the patient sit up, then pierce the abscess in the back part of the throat to all the tongue, and place the hole at the long part of the windpipe; and keep the holes open so that all the water runs out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton in the hole, and tie it up, and leave it so that the rest of the water runs out, then heal the wound until the wound is well.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the blotched cloth does not let the water out of the wound in the mouth, then you should put a feather or an instrument that draws out the water of dropsies there, so that it forms as above; and open .i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 15 days or less, and when it is gathered like before, and so the disease will pass from the patient in due time.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from the horns, and most often from the joints; and this happens for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to be understood: by acrid and watery excess, which is spread to the joints, or from impact; or
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the abscess according to the color of the core; and do not probe for pain, and the abscess is grief.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes an abscess is painful and piercing, and of a flickering color, and never comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, if you know the position of the abscess by touching with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it only comes when you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Who is made by inflame of vein is known by his disposition to the expression by touching of both,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can do well the size on this form, and on other shapes;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and is that you cut the root of the hairs, then the hair is on top, and the line is clear white, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the hair.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the hair is already sown with these hairs, then it is necessary that you take the hair, and the root;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is ajar to the apothecary, or in those who are within the vessels, it is necessary that you deliver all of what is held, and the cup resonates.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	and if the birth of the horse is where it is behind, then it is necessary that you chop all of it, and extract the hoof, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when your work is complete, then apply the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the apothecary's shop
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is the translation of the provided Old French text:
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient groans when he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this disease is very similar to that described above.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	He should lie on his side, then pour the medicine down his throat from above, then hold him by the hair and turn his head to the right.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessel which are near to the penis, and dry them with master, and spread them out flat.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut the vessels sharply from the trunk in a straight line, until they are uncovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off each piece, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	and I put an needle where he has .i. double thread, and tie him to the first place where his eye has come, and tie him closely to the other head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	and then bind them tightly rightwise, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupt moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	and then heal the wound as well as the others where bowels leak, so that no vassal cries because of his privation;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there comes neither harm nor harm, and all vassals come with their eyes, so it is necessary to draw the bowels from all the vassals;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	that he not lose his hair due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The remedies for this illness are as follows: if it is due to an incision, or extension along the abdomen in the region of the bowels, because the intestines descend from that incision into one of the loins;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this incision is either from the syrup or from the extension along the abdomen, and these 18 ways arise from causes such as percussion, jumping, mooing, lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is about the expansion of the medicine, if it happens little by little in a long time, and does not come all at once;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscess is even up to the end, so that the medicine presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is about the section of the medicine, that it makes sudden painful appearance, and the abscess appears different, as the skin turns red, and it is for the exit of the intestine and the body away from the medicine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there is no time for the circumference to separate with the intestine, and it is held back, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for fear, since it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of cauterization is that you command the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound, if he can bring it back;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then order him to place his throat between your hands and cut off the tongues;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then pull up on the skin of the neck, and peel it all off in one piece;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	and bottle within the loins of the back according to that which you have need to open the wound, and so such that the oil can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	and peel off the skin of the testes as far as the leather, until the white skin is completely uncovered from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	and bottle within the index finger in that which is beneath the testicle, in that which is between the white skin which is uncovered from the leather of the scrotum, and between the second one;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and depart that which is behind the testicle, and between the second one; and then move by hand within the scrotum, and let the white skin be above your left hand, and place the testicle on all the skin before the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command to the minister that he extends the staff above, and disconnects what is above the ligature.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and check your two sides if there is any wrapped or white киш that is hard, and if you do not find anything, pour the water into the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take an needle or he has .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and put the water in the back part of the киш that is after the skin of the testicles; after the neck, then cut off the chiés that appear from the threads, until there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then put the one above the other in a cross-like manner, and tie the water, of which we have said that it is desoz to the skin of the testicles, with a strong knot of .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the fils, and bind them together with a piece of string, so that no vassal who feeds them can enter our ears, for the abscess will not come out.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and tie it very tightly according to the first long piece of string, and after these two pieces leave a space which is the length of one's thumb between them; and then with the second pair of strings leave a space which is twice as long as that.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then the rest according to the length of a round leather thong that the ear wears; and sew in the part which is under the skin of the ears, until it is tight, and bent in the shape which we have described above.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then put wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and tie on the string that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cautered the white skin we have said, after the incision, out of fear that the blood will run.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leaves the thread as long as it sews itself; and if it delays to sew, let it be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it sews.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with other cures until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from a hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	I never saw anyone who dared use iron to make a cure.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old one said that it is made like this: you tie the legs together, a little way below the knee, with something light;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut off the top of it, and cure the abscess with this, until the legs stop shedding tears; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No wound comes without pain, as we have said, and open the legs; and if any of the entrails come out, it is a little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and in any case it stays too long at this point, believes he has a wound or syphilis as far as the intestines are released.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	For in the expansion of syphilis which is to the anus, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swollen, and its openings are enlarged.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have mentioned before; and it is never cured with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then rub the place where the wound is with a piece of woolen cloth according to the quantity of two grains:
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then take out the medicine which is inside the skin that has been cut open, and then take the rope and tie it on top of the visible part of the medicine;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then press down on the stomach completely, and cut the .ij. parts of the medicine that are on top of the rope's head, and cut both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then take out the rope' s head, and do not cover up the medicine or extend any other part, as I have told you in the treatment of the worm in the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then treat it with the cure for wounds. And when you cover the hair, if the wound is clean and healed, then let it be.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The fire cautery is more effective, it does not appear in the incision, and the treatments are milder at this location, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the heels
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often times the leather of the heels becomes soft in certain men, for the plies that are within them are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean them, to make a hole in their back and let the moisture go out onto the natural skin; then sew the 2.ij. lips together at one seam, and cut away the excess skin at the seam or at the 3.ij. seams firmly; then sew between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
dou chastrement	of fire cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Saiches that chastisement is a form of treatment in our law, and therefore I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two ways: one is that the mirrour of the beast should answer when questioned, and in the cure of the beast; and the other, because we have often had to chastise certain animals to help us, such as rams and sheep and hogs and others. I therefore say that chastisement is done according to two ways: either by attraction or by splitting. In the way that we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then grab them with your hand until they are set and you can no longer feel them. From castrating a ram: you should burn the beast, and hold the skin of the testicles to your left hand, then tie up the suspender, and bind each ear with one knot when you have well scalded them; and do not leave any little piece of the skin; and this way of castration is milder than that done by attraction, because there may be no delay in the testicles, so that the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	The hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are according to two ways as men: one is that between the two testicles open like a woman's figure, or he has hair, and sometimes his urine flows out;
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tenting is a char placed on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and also women have great comfort from it as if it were a hand, and that is the cure. You should take off the excess of the tenting at your hand or toes, and wipe it lightly; and do not go too far in doing so, lest there be a discharge of blood, then apply another cure until you are well; and at another char which comes out of the mouth of the pregnant woman, and use it, and perhaps it will be gone, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called the old "cow disease". If you take off the tenting, as we have said in the case of tenting, and cure it until it is well.
de erratique	of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratique means "erratic". This term was used to describe something that is unpredictable or unpredictable in nature. In the context of medicine, it could refer to a condition or disease that is unpredictable in its course or symptoms.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the first sentence:
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the next sentence:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Childbirth skill: First, know the natural figure of childbirth, and recognize the signs: when you see a woman hurrying to urinate and smelling the air; then, the baby will soon be born; so you know that this birth is according to nature, with the baby coming out first by its head, and then the second one with it; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly, so the baby comes quickly; for when he descends on his head, the second one comes with him, and the married man is cleansed of his excesses through good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it does not come at all on its feet, or on its shoulders, or hands, or sometimes on its belly, or sometimes on its neck, and turns upside down for a moment, and in various other evil ways; it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out first by its head, and the woman moans and her virtue is weak, then sit her on a saddle, or let the women support her; and pour some oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the midwife between her two legs this little spetumile whose form it is:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and then split the second one, and cut with her nail as much moist as it comes out; and if it does not come out, then rub the woman's womb with muskillaige of fenugreek with oil of sesame; then make her sit and cough for an hour: now then the baby is born. And if the hands go in far, then put the woman on a bench, and raise her feet up; then take the bench away from the ground, and turn it upside down, and tie her, so that she does not fall upright; and if the hands cannot get in, and the baby is dead, then cut the woman's hands with the knife that has been put there, and pull out the child, and leave them both equal.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes down on its feet, then you should lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slowly, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and then stretch it slowly, little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	And if he jumps just as it is being printed, and makes it shake with the cold.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If you jump, then God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he doesn't jump as we have said, if the turn is little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is light-hearted.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk of the earth, and oil from seed, and gum melted, and grind everything together in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the skin of woman, and away this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then let her sit in the hot bath until the ribs are wet;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is wet all over, then let her wear a collar of myrrh, and put it on her, and leave her for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	and then make it sit on a seat, and then shake it and pinch its mouth and nose, and hold its belly lightly, for the baby is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the delivery of the child between her legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if I put the midwife's hands on it little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	and then be sewn up around her neck, and her feet hang down, and she lies on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he folds his hands little by little, and then he puts them on his belly, and he holds the testicles back as long as she is empty;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and his grip does not slip, if he takes his feet and makes his movement, then he moves his belly up, and then I put your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and the child folds little by little; and instruct the woman to lean back as long as the child is being born;
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child who comes out wide a hand holding
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If you cannot bring it back, if the woman gets up and goes;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, if you make her sit down on the bed, and stretch out her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then arrange the muscullaige that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it doesn't get pregnant, then if the fair one is seated on .i. a siege, then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and make the child according to natural figure, and let her shake, and command that she stretch herself as long as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's issue on his neck, and has spread her hands, and her face turns toward the mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	Then let the dance teacher take his hand, then turn it slowly, and gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, if put on the muscular nature of late and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little and little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the fire is seated on .I. seat, and command that it burns; and the fire shakes itself.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this way to all the second part, if cover the second with your nail, as long as the moisture is empty;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he falls on his face and on his neck, then the cap comes off, so that it is not held back, and the man dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as you have done it, and order the woman not to kneel:
adonques si istra legierement.	then lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twin's exit.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	That is known to happen many times, but never happens twice; and this is not a strange thing, and seldom happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live if it happens once;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, if they are multiplied, and are devised by the physician who devises them, which is tied to the wound;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never happen naturally as we all do, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it grieves him, if the cure is as we said, and let the ball be soft, and make quickly and lightly what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do this as well as it can for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No child is formed in the womb: neither male nor female; I, J, II, III, V, VI, VII, or more up to XV, and all are formed by measure of the wise glory.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and understand that the ball is able to do all of this, for by chance similar things will happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it is done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose child has died or her womb is empty, and she does not conceive, and you are forced to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary that you know that his wife is of healthy virtue, and has no accident where she might fear death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that his wife be placed on her back, and her knees bent downward, and her legs raised up;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister paint her from top to bottom, or she be laid in bed so that she may be treated for the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oil with musk and fenugrec and flax seed, then grease his hands with these oils and these muscillaiges;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then fill them with light wine, then dip [them]. i.e. pour the wine or they will bottle the onyx that are suitable for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care so that the child is properly dressed so that it does not slide on his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	then dip the onyx into their hair or their neck or their mouth or their chin or their jawline or near their sideburns;
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and when it is slipped onto his feet, dip it or poke it and touch the sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he taint the onyx in his right hand, and put the scabbard between his two hands of the left hand, and he lightly holds the onyx bottle to any of these places that we have said until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the onyx:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then put it between another onyx, or the taint is of no use to you, so that extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly from one side to the other, so that it moves, and the onyx teeth are held in place, as is this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part of it lingers, if he oils some of his two feet with oil, and bottles up that part, and draws out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if a part of it lingers, put this ointment or more up there, and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	and if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then wrap it in a cloth, until all of it is gone.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	and then wrap the wound with a bandage in the joint of the foot or ankle, and likewise do on the other hand, and at .ij. feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	If the baby is large and stuck in the birth canal, or if it has an acute angle of presentation,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then you must push the spine-like fluid between your two fingers, and turn the head and pull out the sharp point;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you use the instrument called "almidah", which is shaped like this with the tools or paste that comes after it;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so help yourself by the great natural power;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then cut the bones from the nails,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and so help yourself by the great natural power; if they pricked, cut them up, and draw them out with force, and if they bleed, stop the bleeding.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be drawn out, then cut it into pieces with a knife so that you can get it out.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or seizes the ribs, then you must pierce it as long as the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if it is inflamed in the feet, then light traction is applied, and the treatment with the poultice is placed lightly on the foot.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	and if it is dislocated in the belly or the breast, then you must hold it with the hand wrapped in a cloth.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and pierce the belly or the breast as long as the moisture that is there runs.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if another limb is broken, and the joint remains still,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if the ball joint of his hand is completely separated from the arm, and he draws it to the mouth of the socket;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then pour in a little oil or wine there, and draw it firmly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the socket is tightened by cold which has come to it, so that it does not move,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and it is to be treated with damp and greasy things;
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it is put on his back, and you make it flat, then treat as we have said above in the child alive.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no power, so to speak, then let the meat be cut into pieces, and leave nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring those who are mentioned above, who come from the mare.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood comes out, it is restrained with salt water and others are brought to cure.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been pregnant but was now dead, then another was examined. I refused to examine the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the apotheosis came in the boudel, and inflated so much that it began to cause great distress.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought long and hard, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong plaster of attraction, and put in it a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for where there is no bone, the stomach does not ache.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sewed the wound closed, and held the bones together by hand, as long as the woman was improving.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and waited for the woman to get well soon, and it was fixed a little of the bow in place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I only remembered this chapter when, because of something, the master tried a strange thing and he knew how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her bed
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	"Nevertheless, the horns should be somewhat thinner than the restriction, and made from ebony or boxwood;"
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	"And the mouthpiece should have a diameter of two fingers in width, and the bar 1.5 hands in length;"
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	"And the three measurements should be two fingers in width and 1.5 hands in length, with one finger's width between them;"
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and the two joints are pressed together in the mouth of the mother to open when the .ij. horns return.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, its subtler and lighter appearance made from ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of the claws;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has .ij. joints .ij. supports, as you see, of a long palm, and .ij. two wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the mother open the instrument to all its extent, so sit the woman on 1.i. bed, legs spread and feet hanging down,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and pour upon them .ij. drops of the unguent that you have made together in the bowl, and hold the handle of the instrument away from its edge;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then move your hand around the entire instrument, evenly, according to the quantity you judge right to open the mouth of the bowl, until the ball comes out as it should.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all raised up, and its multiples are arranged; and when you see them ready, the faster you work, and the higher you raise for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare the instrument in good time, it will be a reason for delay; there is no excuse for not doing so because of its need.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she falls because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	and if it does not fall, it is well. If it does, however, and a small pestle or mortar is available, and herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as chamomile, mint, fennel, aniseed, dill seed, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all of these herbs, or any of them, are boiled or poured from a pot on the fire; then put one tube or pestle and mortar in the pot, and the other over the mouth of the woman, and
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the ringworm until the fumes come out of the marrow; then make it shake, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then take the second one immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and does not get better, order that it soak its left hand in oil of sage or in muscatel wine, and then pour it out into the air,
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and then take the second one; and when she has found it, if she presses it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marrow does not break at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it is necessary to move lightly from right to left and then back; and thus he will come and dislodge himself again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if his mouth is sore and swollen, we have said the cure of swallowing, and of smoking herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that we have said, then keep so that you do not stray when you treat;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the mare, that you bind him to the cunt of the woman, then the clisteryse with four-armed ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it is put on fire, let it be left to cool, and it will come back stronger; but in any case, when it is put on (the fire), if it gives off a bad smell in the stomach and in the head, and blights the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If there is need then there come fumigations bearable to this; no one has tried fomentation of nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fume the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is like to see a dog, and put the head in a thin cloth, and the shoulders wide over the fire; or
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations on the coals, and the scabies until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but it is broken up by a subtle poison.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If, therefore, the boy should pierce it with that poison at his right hand, and does not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and keeps the joint from touching it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put on other part water mixed with wine and oil, then the ointment cure until he is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, put out a cane of wood, and let him keep his hands open, and be osteized when the wound is healed so that he can move his hands freely.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no chance of a sudden seizure from the wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover suddenly: if you are cured, as we have said about the cane of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistula that comes from the foundation is a nodation, and grow more than those coming from the foundation of a part, or in space between .ij. parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodation is old, if it opens, and in a moment of moisture an open wound or subtle bow appears,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these fistulas never persist; and they are caused by what is discharged or vented when the patient makes an emission, and by accident in a jump one way or another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate only to the bladder, and only halfway up the penis; and they reach the junction of the scrotum, and at the tip of the cow's neck.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus recognize the fistula persisting to the foundation, and not persistent:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and put your little finger or foundation, and pour a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if there is a twist, if you pour a drop of quicksilver, or .i. a horse's hair, as long as you feel the drop or hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is no perforation, no wind, no vision, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If he pricks, then hurry to cure him.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And if the fistula pierces until the bladder or until the urinary conduit, and if it leaks urine, and cannot be relieved by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it pierces only up to the junction of the hip, then try this before going any further.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting or pain in the back, and if it does not cause any pain by touching it, then there is no need for medicine or further manipulation.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas there is no cure except hard work, and the vanity of foolish mirages that get mixed up with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are neither persian nor ancient, there is hope of health through fire, as I have experienced,
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and make his legs come up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour water into an basin, or a bucket if there is a turn of the spine, as long as you know where the basin comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient has pain at the base, then you must put your index finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Then feel with your ring finger to see if it has been pierced; and if you can feel the needle or scalpel between your thumb and index finger, then know that it is perforating;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not cause any trouble then it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	All of this causes some to recover, but few completely recover; however, this happens occasionally;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one does, if it is heated the fine cautery according to the breadth of the fistula, as said above;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the bottle all hot in the fistula, until it comes out of the foundation; and do this .ii or iiii times, until you know that these hairs are burnt which are resembling to an owl's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of tents wet in oil will dry it up, until that hair is gone, and then the doctor of ointment will wrap the hair and stick it together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healthy, it is good. If not, otherwise cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it pricks between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the foundation, and inside your two fingers there is a thick covering of cloth or silk, and you see the fistula to the one who stops the covering from within.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the cloth of the beginning of the fistula, and close again before the tent, and heat the fire after, as far as it comes to the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered, and burn; then take those cloth-covered things that look like an owl's feather, and there is none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun shines on you, and heat enters between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicine burns.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cauterization brings together the following twenty-one things: that is to say, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then dry them out thoroughly before applying them to wet skin or cooked meat, until the skin dries up completely and the flesh is burned in the fire.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound with dry herbs that stick to the hard, caked blood, and the medicine is dried out.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once it has been reset, so it is healed and does not come back again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes out just from the foundation, and is distant from the heart, turn it up or down, and see that one.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	And if you feel the itchiness and it is between iij. is the thread or the syrup or the charcoal, or it is ready to pierce, then there is only a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of iii. ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you can not stop the flow of blood, and do not want to cut it, then see that one.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far in the foundation, so you do not cover the foundation that holds the ground, and comes out by the way of nature;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the physician, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case it should heal, or you remove that covering and clean it up well from the foundation, or by stretch or by any other tool;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then mix that wood in the wound as well as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound, and hold back the fistula in the opposite part of the foundation: it is lighter work for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there is no place for fistulas according to this method: and when you stick the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the base of the skin above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if one takes a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and I stick .i. wire in .ij., and stick the tent on all the wire in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persisting in the margin inside, then remove the wire from that one, so that you stick your two at the base;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and train the head of the shaft, and bring together the .ii. shoulders together, and hold apart, and leave it .i. day or .ii..
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain at any time, until the rope has passed between those two, and they are chafing;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound as long as it is souded and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too completely enclosed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to do for the lameness if perfect, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spatemile with thorns that one makes a fistula is very hot and painful; therefore it is not possible to make it perfectly well without great pain.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	On the other hand, one must not do what one cannot do; for one must not do what one can do. For this is not right to do for the lameness if perfect, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healthy.
des emorroydes	of the hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	1 Emorrydes are according to these manners: or they are at the bottom of the foundation, also as a grain of resin, and there are small ones and great ones, and cut close together,
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	2 and one or more of them are at the bottom of the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are at the top have little moisture, and those that are at the bottom have great moisture, and those that are in the middle have moderate moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	3 and then cut a little of the yellow water or a little of the blood, and they have the color of the body; but those that are at the bottom have great blood, and those that are in the middle have moderate blood.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	4 and the cure for those who are at the bottom of the foundation, so that you command the patient to sweat in bed as long as the foundation is hot, and they discover the filth; but those that are at the top have little filth.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in a hurry, and hold it like a claw, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the nail falls off because of moisture, take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and remove them with your fingers, then cut them off, and powder them with hot powders that are in the fire's place;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy again;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if his foundation cannot come out, let the patient be clistered with a hot and harsh clistre to wash out what is in the foundation so that it can come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Let the patient be bathed, and if his fibers are firmly attached to the foundation, then the cure is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you shall press them with your nail or with tweezers, and cut them off, then heal them as we have said, until they are well, and do not incise them with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you bring the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then turn the thread over and over on top of the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread together behind the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is large; then hold the thread in place, and tie the knot, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave it. i.e. to stop the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation. i.e. dip in oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until it has passed wind, and when it has defecated, if the patient is cured of anointing and other cures, until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	and finally on the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying up of the bowels from nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you cut off a spur or your fingernail too high, leaving it exposed to moisture;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and then treat it until it is hard again as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot harden, then shave it more closely than before, until it bleeds and is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat as long as he is healthy.
dou fremit	he perspires.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Here comes the translated text:
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and it does not burn his throat, and you can hear it as if he were dead, and it spreads throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a feather from an ostrich, or a strong vulture's feather, and put this feather on the pulse, as long as the purple circle covers the pulse entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand on all the feather as long as you cover completely the pulse, and put it in place, and scratch the pulse from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a wound of a feather of rain or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run over it:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, so it does not hurt, but press And if you see, cauterize the pulse, as it is in front or chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cloth
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No once made is the cloth of silver or bronze, or of melted gold or brass; and no once made are these small or great instruments, according to those that they are to be used.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	So once made are those for the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cloth is small and large depending on its width, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and I say there is a rift where the belly is tied together, so that you see it, and where the legs are within the cavity, and on one side there is an opening of 12 inches, and on the other 1 inch.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be where one puts medicines from a bladder of best wine or parchment, and let it pierce all around the smaller openings,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each opening let there be 1/4 of an inch of space, then bottle in these openings strong thread of twisted rope in 10 or so threads around, and put together the belly as if it were a sheep;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the lid is placed in front of a strong tool, then make it into a ring; and that is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head with olive oil or almond oil or a similar substance, then pour it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the ministers hold it together with their two hands until it is completely warm, then remove the oil and place the patient's legs against the wall.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Then let the medicine be poured out on the patient, as much as he can bear; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize with fire due to disease of the stomach, and the medicine is poured out quickly, then it is too much for him if he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or the abscess, then also the clister is too thin like a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the clister, thin as skin, so that the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures for hands and medicines, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where they are made, and for this reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and the cutting of a sword or a dagger, or an ax, or a spear, or a sledgehammer, or similar things; or
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or where the heart is struck, as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; or
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs or the head comes first, and the bone is not broken, if you take care to look for movement of stones or similar things, then the skin is often torn and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the warmth of an abscess: if it is too soon to know for certain whether it comes from a wound or not in the head itself, but rather if it comes from a wound at the opposite end from the part that was injured;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and keep the patient away from wine and thick meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	and if he does not sweat, if his meat is not reduced, and if he does not drink wine or eat cheese.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and wet the wound, if a blister forms, soak it in oil or wine with astringent;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no blister, if it is placed on the wound, if it is fresh and not moved by the air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, place some onions on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, bring them together with sutures, as I will say for wounds in the belly, from the stitch.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone and blood, and holds only for a little while, then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meat, as tested and baked wheat, also like poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find putrid flesh on the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then chop it all off, and burn it up, and then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which, without stopping, and it cannot stop with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, so that it is a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if he does not benefit from it, then cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder that hardens so that fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood .ij. parts; live fire .iij. parts, and the powder finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and the bandage forms, until it is well dried up and joins all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell, for one should not bind the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one use salt at all, unless one has dragon's blood and fire oil, but the arm should not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arm has moved the wound, most certainly it is infected, so one must put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some distilled water and honey, or bread made of barley flour, until it heals;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let them grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	For if the bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the breaking of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the chief, but the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the case, if there is no other obstacle to the healing process but to allow the wound to heal naturally and put nothing on it that might hinder it, for it hinders healing and makes it retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its course runs with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	however, if the medicine is like warm water mixed with oil and rosin, and washed with lukewarm water;
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones according to this method, and wet oiling.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that the bandage is not enough, then heal until it is well.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and full of bowels and blood, and the hole or lower down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and the flow of blood comes from it, if the darkness and fever come, and the cauterization is done;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if he sneezes from his throat, or coughs, and the wind is kept back, so that the meat goes forward.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if the cough goes up the throat lane, and does not touch the throat but returns it to its natural state;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he is left a few days, and is cured of garlic-based remedies as long as he is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then it is wanted;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, if you can't carry them all, and those that you cannot bring, leave it until the wound is rotten.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let the issue be dried up and firm;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on the ointment.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound to see if there is wind coming out of it. Know then that the wound is fatal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh in every part of it, then do not put the powder on it at all, nor bind it up so that it does not heal completely;
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and turn your attention to the patient and watch over him closely;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I met an attractive omen, and lay down. ij. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no omen, put cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound for .iij. days, or more often, or many times;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor a strange trembling of the heart due to the fire cautery;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good arrangement, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the burns and other wounds, as long as they are healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and a fistula forms, then know that it is necessary to operate, as should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a knife or sword, and it is simple, or on the front or back, then know how to heal that one.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	s'elle est grande, de couture ; et s'elle est petite, de poudre, et s'elle est pressée en l'os, et en a copié des pièces, si vous voulez la plaie, et les traiteras fort s'ils sont déséquilibrés;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislocated, let the wound fester, and so will be the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds or other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	and the rupture of the womb
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and small and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound there is no escape of the intestines, or the intestines are torn from within, so that the entry of water;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitch is more painful, and never less painful than the small one that the great one causes;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	For if we do not put them back in place immediately, we will never get them back in place, putting them back in turn;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	for this reason the intestines swell so that they feel cold, if they return more to needles
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for this reason the pain in the mouth is lessened, because it remains in its place, unlike other injuries
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the tear in the belly is according to four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common seams come into the seam of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and he sews together the other wounds of the chest, and .ij. other personal stitches are common to all wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and so they are more properly sewn from the belly, and I will say each one and I will explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out, then
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	I say that it is necessary to sew together the chest first, then the belly, then the arm, then the leg, and then the lower member;
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in a certain way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten an sponge or .i. mol drapeil in warm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	You cook in sharp water and cypress and spike.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine as long as it swells until it is broken;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and no longer does this wine restraining, and is sour that it tastes of vinegar.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling leaving, if you moisten the intestine with sharp water or spicy wine and cook it,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this means is the entrance closed to a little thing.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the instrument by which one copes with hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to moisten it so that the size is reduced;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we do not trim it unless there is great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it divides inside and out, and check the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	and when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines spill forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is reset according to its natural shape in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you have the ability to do this, for it is of great value.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	then it is necessary that you bring the patient to lie on their back.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part of the chest the abdomen,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if the head and breast are higher than the abdominal parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the abdomen is torn in one of the two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if the torn part is higher than the other,
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so it is necessary to treat what I say in great wounds and pain.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	In small wounds however this treatment is not suitable,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then take two hand ministers who will rub the whole wound with their hands,
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips together,
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of stitching.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and that you twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and I will thread a strong needle with good thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the leather with the eyelets of the thread,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is to cut through the skin inside, as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join together the 20 main pieces of leather together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then stretch out a doubled thread through the needle from both ends,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and then join together the 20 pieces of leather in front of the wound,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave .i. two spaces, and put another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then lay the thread down as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles fall, fine and thick.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the fine needles fill the whole wound, and the very large ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this reason, let them be fine.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and do not push the needles too far from the edge of the wound and the hide,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not close and open the wound before the bandage.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cover the head of the pin, so that it does not burn the patient to sleep,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or drapes on the head of the pin to keep them from moving,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is closed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this way of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it suffers a needle or .i.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and are joined together with the thread of a needle or i strong thread cut short;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have understood all these things together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and if I return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that you thread a drape;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space of about two fingers between each stitch, making the stitches very small;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is used by the tailor;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that had a good appearance but was in the belly.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was stabbed with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm deep,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and the wound was made by the intestines which were well
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And so the wound was in his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought him the intestine and so he began to be well.  .xxiiij. hours later,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound healed in .xv. days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the mirror told him that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and don't heal it with ointment, because I am in .i. place where they are not found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put cotton wool on the wound three times a day, and wash it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the three clean ways to stitch:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and dip it in the liquid from the far side only;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	as soon as she feels the pain of the piercing in her right breast, if it is from the nipple or cost, or where you have pricked the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and then let her pierce herself from the outside of that area to the center;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and then understand this stitch if you also sew like the furrier sews fur;
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the stitch once the seam is completed on one side, and pick it up on the other side, until the seam is finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of sewing, which Galien distinguished properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is so that as if there were no thread, which joins the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the main roots to the other root in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	file an awl or root of mirach nearest, and pierce that one only,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the 17 joints of the body;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside in just until it reaches the center;
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as 17 joints of the body;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce the other one from the outside in just until it reaches the center, and pierce the other 17 joints of the body, on the other side as well;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the mode of suturing, which is the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	The Galileo's say thus of this word, and none bear witness to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	that the stomach be sewn with .ij. needles, or there be thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and must one needle be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with corroded needles;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is in the midsection of the belly
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	that this suture is more painful than others of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as it is with other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If you remove the intestines, and cut them up; then put the powder over them while they are still warm.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if it is moved, put it on any ointment that is present, until the wound has closed.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and if it is moved, put it on any ointment that is present, and let the wound close.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then clean the wound well as you would with others, until it is healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, put on, as soon as it begins to go away, cotton wool,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and stir it .ij. times a day until it is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will not form a union with the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary for you to moisten another light with oil of thyme or hot oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the legs, and clean the buttocks.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if there is pain or inflammation in the belly button, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the black wine tatsters, and sometimes the inflammation comes up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and the hole within, and know that when it is the large intestines, so it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jun" cannot be healed when it is still raw,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is because of the plants of the veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the womb.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar jumps out of the wound, let it be set back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and becomes black, then you must know the place that is black, so that there is no blood flow.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the lien;
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two joints hanging from the side of the wound all the way to the edge so as not to hurt the extraction when it is done, and the wound is closed.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bole
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore it in some way,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I have seen some who were born with a club or a belly wounded by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became infected and putrid, and had a discharge and foul odor.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it with the medicines I had, and did not stop applying them until it healed, and I sewed up the wound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that the wound was healing, I doubted that the disease was still in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm, but delay in better provisions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they told me that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he should be tied up in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take some large testicles, then spread the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the testicles have opened the mouth, so that it is placed on the 1/2 lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she pulls her mouth up.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he lifts his head, and this is held so that it cannot be released,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then meet again in this way after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed;
et cout la plaie.	and count the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If it burns in the bowels, and causes no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this thread of intestine that has been cut off,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then place this thread at the top of this cloth.i. a thin twisted linen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the needle, and sew around the intestine, and cut it back out;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing with a needle is only useful if done according to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, most importantly when it is in one of the small intestines, then there is no cure except with great care.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	knows that all wound or abscess, when it heals, is called universal "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most often when it has healed and the bowels have moved.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And the fistula is according to the theory of the nature of the tissue tough and white, and one does not feel pain there.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also like a bird's feathers;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	nor is there ever clear rain, nor thick fog;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	neever poking, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no cure,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is due to one of these .viiij. causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is due to the small blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or because of their evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard matter inside, and on the lips, which does not allow them to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Where there is too much bow.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Where the legs are twisted, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Where the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Where for this cause corruption is a manner of disease;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	"Or if there are veins or bones:"
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have outlined all of these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division."
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Or tell you how to treat fistula by hand surgery."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It is known that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is any change in the principle member, and similar moves.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of great difficulty of cure, and there is only labour and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come to light until now that I have mentioned it, and you have promised to cure it,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see the fistula clearly with your own eyes, take a piece of leather or iron and, if the fistula is straight, feel it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if its fistula is twisted, so the search for a thin rope of plunging.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the plunging turns to the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if its fistula is deeply injured and you cannot well search for it with ropes,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	then the cautery by fire through one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For moisture is short from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then clean it with your power so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and is completely shaved,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you really know the place, whether it is far from a joint, a nerve, an artery or a vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Here is the translation of the provided Old French text:
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and the bones are broken and the rotten corroding things that are within them;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the cure as long as it is healthy;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and its deep hole is well-founded in the right place, if it comes that you cauterize it perfectly, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	and then I soaked them in a medicated broth, and poured it up to the head of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that is retained at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put on garlic-infused holy oil, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by that, then the fire cautery as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his eye is corrupted by the fistula, then the patch.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is injured in the main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if his eye is uncovered and there is corruption and blackening, if the king holds out until the corruption is entirely bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment of things that are ruined, as much as he is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not healed, and returns bowing as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	for you are not yet able to move:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	and if you stay in bed and rest
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is thus sound, then it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	if not, know that the corruption is too perfect, that you cannot come to him;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other means than to be easier by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it at the claws,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if you extract with an instrument suitable for this.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if he has several bones, if they are twisted, do not leave more than one in place;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you cover and moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something that prevents infection.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it so that the hair grows around the bone.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then the bones will heal more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you have only this corruption as long as the blackening is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	and then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes just to the edge of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it comes to cover all the way up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is sealed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man aged xxx-xx years who had a pain in his leg due to an internal cause that originated in the core,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as matter came out of the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no apparent cause to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but he stares at them because of his madness so much on that the abscess opens.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and in corroding with matter they become a fistula, and I came out of a hole so great that all was bowing and moistening the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many miraculously healed in .ij years, and there was no skill in this art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines that he was cured with,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and who runs through the openings with great speed.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his body would turn red when he ran, and had an orange-colored skin.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent in one of these openings, and then searched for all the openings
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one came together with the other on both sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I was hurrying then, and I hit on one of the holes as hard as I could until I uncovered a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it腐敗したそして壊れていた、そして腐敗は骨の中まで来ていた;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew what had happened to the bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption except for that which I found;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to heal the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and it could not be healed;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and softened it, and then I held it, and leaned down to weld the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not as much as cup my hand around one end of the bone, and I pushed it forward with all my might.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	and then I treated it with medicine; and it was healed and firmly welded together,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and do not wish to recommend the work for anything but the weakness of the disease, which cannot be borne.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and from the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For with blood loss there was often, but he was completely healed, and
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and gave birth to a hard mass of bone, and was of good temperament and had no harm or contrary in all things, nor did it affect his breath or coming into being.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if his nose is broken at any place under the heart, then it shall be done thus:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take .i. a thread, and draw out to the head of the bone that is broken,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command any one who extends it upwards,
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another thread of a larger size than the first thread around it and tie it above the joint that is dislocated,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and let the head be, so that you take the cart rotted on the ditch,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the cart on top of the ground where you see hay, so that the hay does not damage the cart;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place .i. kindling or a pile of straw over the cart to cover up the rotted cart;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes also;
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if his nose is corroded, and does not open any more, and the corrosion is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover the chest completely; then put on .I. a hot coal,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then tie one part of the corruption to the other with silk, and let the silk be long from the corruption .I. piece, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corrosion is in the joint, then disassemble the joint corruption, and tie the bone or what it contains on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption occurs in the continuation of the twenty-one joints, there is no other pain than that of the cup.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if corruption occurs when it is poked with a hand or when it is poked with a foot, this is very strong.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but you must also inquire about the corruption, how it hurts you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and wash it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hurt you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each kind of work there is an appropriate tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will teach you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you use the instrument that is right for this.
dou feu	dou fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may be dislocated due to cold or due to heat;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicine which is corrupted by the treatment of the medicines, and it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes from death or from the evil which is greater, from the failure of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the members become black, and that they seem to be burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then after the blackness, then goes those corrosion of member by member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and seizes all the body; if you hurry to cover it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the percussion of some venomous creatures, like a sea scorpion or a weasel and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the head of the two, if it covers, and does not give space to come until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the cup does not reach the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arms.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, so that the cup reaches the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no need for a test of its strength except for the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and completely stop it when the corrosion comes at the foot: if it comes to the first joint, so that the cup is after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to stand, so cover all of the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, so cover at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other danger to the patient but to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or sew the member so that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend two ministers one of the lines downstream, and another minister the other line upstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you displace the bar that is between the .ij. lines to .i. spadille wide, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the cap or silk, and place from each side 1. drappill of linen, so that the silk does not touch the ground;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient other wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the blood flows out when you work, then cauterize it well.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bandage the member with a convenient strap, and cure it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that there was once a wise man in some town:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a darkness that seemed like fire burned.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion came first in his two feet, so much that it stained all the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he took off all the copper from the foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after that, the corrosion returned to his two hands, and came to me;
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put him on reflective things after purification of the body, and cannot stop the corruption;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I do not say, that I had hope of reflecting on the substance;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his country,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he held his arm away from the copper pot, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have told you this only so that you may do something else if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There comes one time when incising a lump of flesh, and delays so long that it makes great assembly of bowels;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it rips and piercing, and springing the bowels, and staying the viscera, as our vassals;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the leather that is above it is also as soft as... drape-leads untied,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not cut it until you reach the bone, nor until you hit the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone in perfect proportion, then it is called a "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is that you wrap this wound very tightly, and especially when it is thin, as with a scarf.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not wet it for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have promised that the leather will be dried, and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the leather is hard like a wheel, if the cure of the cloth is thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	regardez si ses seins sont gros, et le bouton qui en est fait a un odeur puante,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	therefore the egyptian medicinal enema which is made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take oil and alum and equal parts of lime, and put it to cook in a 1/2 vessel on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red and as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in the cauterization of the breast, and extract the stone;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	make this mutton soup, as many times as the breasts are changed, and the meat is ready;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never is clisteriized by water of ash,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour it, and clisterize it, until you know the juice is well extracted;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor water of ash;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the plaster is made of water and honey, or if it has a little bit of lead powder crushed up.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you make the plaster with honey and wine, which honey has the property to clean and wash
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the blood sharp.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have promised that the breasts are well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the cautery burns a wound that has just been born,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and is that you squeeze the ointment thoroughly, and make it with oil of roses and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cauterize it with certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the treatment of herbs;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the patient is pregnant, and the cervix is narrow, and the cautery of the wound cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If the width of a piece of iron is reduced slightly, and put between the shoulder blades from Egypt,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Egyptian base oil, so that it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so that the oil can slip in easily:
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the hole where it will be inserted is above or below, so that it is:
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is complete, if it does not leave a trace.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the loins so as to see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so that the bow comes down to the lowest point.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is complete, if it does not leave a trace.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the chest of a person with a sheet as you see fit,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then arrange it in some way: that the bowstring runs lightly down, and do not leave anything of the bowstring;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medicines that solidify it over the chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are on a linen drape that covers the whole chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and then chop off as much of the breast as possible. i.e. cut away more of the first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	for the poultice should be on top very well over .i. another cloth according to the quantity of the breast,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on top of the breast to even it out, and don't remove the large cloth for at least a few days;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and one that is over the breast, remove often to check the poultice,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows whether what comes out of the bowels is venom or pus or sufficient or indigestive;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when the medicine has spread somewhat in the chest and you see the nature that rises from the lung's surface,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast is irritated and bring the ointment;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then remove it in the morning, or third day, and when you remove the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if change .i. other cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes sore after many days, know that the breast is not affected.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poison comes after a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for the sanctity of the hour. For there are men who delay healing their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and who bow their heads down when they feel pain after many days, that their sin does not affect them;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and whose sin does not delay healing, and is enhanced, so that such medicines are mixed with moisture in a substance and dried out in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	so that it becomes clear, for there is much vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a fine powder, and make it with olive oil, and rose it with equal red wine.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then the same is cooked and used; and this is even better when it is cooked and increased in size,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when a fine powder is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take mirr and aloes and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it is taken from the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in a patch .i. cloth, and place it against the breast, and once I administer one artichoke long,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in simple or compound uses: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and so the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and then you know that corruption is perfect, and it affects the bone, or hard members, or limbs;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the doctor of the cure of fistula, if as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is an abscess that arises from the thumb of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is sent away, and no attention is taken, so that it comes back with a swelling.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and grind it so that they cut off the root of the ointment, and perhaps they cut it all off;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corruption up to the bone, so that it comes with a painful stink, and the two cheeks are wide apart, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure is of no benefit,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	if it is necessary for you to take off all the excess that has been stored under the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if he grasps it with his hand, and begins to prick, and bleeds it,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	if you put the finger of the hand that pricks on the nail so that it does not bleed.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and pour it onto the nail from above, and pour it carefully and lightly,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining nail burning and corrosive medicines to destroy everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the healer use onions until he is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	If the corrosion is in the bone, then saw it and trim it hard, because as long as the corrupted bone is there, it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the two corrup
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And let the healer use onions until he is well.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is fierce, and bruised, and smells of great pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then take the nail with a spud from above, cutting across,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cut does not go too deep into the nail bed, because then the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is something, put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the sore at the base of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	the one that is adjusted so that it grows in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there are bones or joints, and never a finger,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and neither of them is born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us both.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who is born with a dual nature does not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and he who is born between two joints moves.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the charnel one is so light in some way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the size of the charnel one is so light in some way:
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born with a joint at the root are difficult to cure: if you hold them down with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who are born with a joint out of place or twisted, it is necessary that you first cut the skin roundly up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the bone with a suitable knife and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, or by the joining of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you take this sulfur, so that it is repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	and then place between two tents or drapes wet with oil, so that it does not stick;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two thin pieces of linen, until the threads are stuck together, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Des vils	The vils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The vile vis are huge, enveloped, filled with superfluity of melancholy, which come from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more is found in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads, while others
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It therefore comes that you do not give any spurring of horses, and then the health of the bazaar.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other manner is that you free the vein, and traie all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size should be according to this manner: raise the first leg with hot water very strongly, until the large veins are thin.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the sick leg from above the knee down to the shin;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut the vein in .i. length, or in .ij. or in .iij., of a broad size
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then remove and draw up the black blood to your hand, from one side chief to the other, as much as the virtue of the disease permits the patient to endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then let it rest, and instruct him to dye his meat with black wine;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and then begin the evacuation and sweating when the veins are clear, and nurse the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then dip it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then dip the part of the leg at the ankle, or in the area between the knee and the heel;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then spread the skin with oil, and peel the vein from each part, until it feels smooth when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it is red and black, and when it goes in or leather so looks as a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pour the oil of azaleas until it is raised from the leather, and then put it in the onyx lightly,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then pour the oil of azaleas for another two; then scorch the leather on the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then cut it to the root, as you have done, and pour it in another onyx, as you have done first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut another piece of wood, or as many as you need, then smooth it, and glue it to the bottom of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then trim and smooth out the piece up to the second size; then remove it from one size to another until it is completely finished, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot lift and trim it, then thread a very strong double-threaded needle.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	then smooth and trim it, and tie it with thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is done;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from breaking, for if it breaks, we cannot pull or lift it out, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have treated it all, put wool wet with wine and oil over the wound; and heal until he is well.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and it is not straightened, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then you must split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and heal it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of iron that one uses to cut the vein if it is curved, and doesn't cut but rather cuts the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
De la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and in another place than in the legs, and this comes from the pus that comes from the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	if it comes from within the body creeping and turning, between skin and shell.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes in the leg a great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the legs change, and the disease begins to move outside, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the linen hanging down to the leg, and as many times as there is a point where it goes out, if the wrapping around the linen and the bandage;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, take a part of it, wrap that part around again, and do not cover the root entirely until it is all wrapped up;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cover it, if it enters into the char, and brings about an abscess or a rash where it is, and causes great illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains or scars.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and once this vein is treated of .v. palm of long, or of .x.,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some good people came to me, who was of .x. palm long, and when you chop it, if it is a little raised or deformed, and pierce it up to the font,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	then all is well; and let the matter which is within it be voided, and put the remedies in place of corruption any day, then heal as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never cut at this vein with sharp razors, and least of all when it is incised in the joint of the foot or of the leg.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it causes great pain and injury; so then it must be treated as we have said above.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that come between the skin and the hair
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our country "buffalo disease," because it often affects buffaloes.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a little worm that was born between leather and saddle, and goes all over the body going up and down.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it smells good when it goes from limb to limb, until it rips the leather where it went, and jumps far.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is covered with pus of some humors, if it comes towards and coils and twists and worms or insects that come out;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts its maliciousness, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes out at the mouth,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	for fear of entering, and destroying the oil; and such things have often happened.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and drained, so can one only do it when it is:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So that it may be done with a strong ligature tightly tied,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut off above and below it, and dip it into boiling water, and you will not find it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the fire cautery, as long as he dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest damage it causes is if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see the head coming towards the oil, then hold back the spell with your hand, then cast it away and leave it.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and use a bad medicine to clean out the harmful odors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and are made sick with putrefaction of meat.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and moves from member to member; and I saw the one I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see a sick woman, and she uncovered her breast, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her breast.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and then I saw it grow like a worm in her shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	faster than anything else, it seemed to me to be alive and shining as silver when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from the affected area, and settled in her shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later corrupted throughout the whole body, as it came to the other breast;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that she twisted all over the body again, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how she moved from member to member, for I have never wanted such a disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I have seen many people who, when they had pain in one place, felt it in another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not want it, if as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry chest and open veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason does she seem so wind-blown and constricted;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear to these people who are delightful, who have moist chests and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see this disease healed, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the wound is cleaned and bandaged well, and then it is covered with a cloth so that the wind does not blow on it.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see the hair,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure of this disease, if like pills that are rotten, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the places from which they come.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some with great points, and small, and curly, and welded;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have .ij. angles, and those that have tongues, and those whose pieces are separated;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those who are injured in any limb so long as they are not injured according to .ii. manners: or if the limb is injured in principle,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she is injured in any of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary for you to remove the arrow, for death comes after a number of preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not manifest itself to you, and if the arrow has not been fully extracted, then turn it over, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	and the sign of the skull when the arrow catches and pierces the bone, and the surgery that is on top of the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when cutting and turning and twisting and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of speech, and vomiting of food;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is a loss of smell or hearing; and perhaps it loses its speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and salt from the wet wound that looks like pus, and also as if it were burned with fire;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign will warn you, if you keep the cure, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it pricks or hurts, is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and the arrow might also be like a bird, and in black blood, and cold sweat comes and faints:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And so there is doubt of death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that does not have a poison is that there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily and trembles with fear.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters into the shell of the chest, then the small ribs ache; and there is great pain and sorrow and breathing; and all the limbs move with a tremble.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters into the stomach, perhaps there is no foam coming out of the wound, indicating that it has entered into the digestive tract and caused a disturbance within.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters the belly, and there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow by the route it took through the intestines.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine flows out in spurts and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member - if it is the face or neck or throat or shoulder or arm or spine or leg or foot, and similar things - are safe according to many considerations.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow enters a nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous  - as I will tell you about my own experience - then do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There was once a man who had an arrow stick or lance, or something like that, at the root of his neck;
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and tore off some of the fat from the ear, and was cured without a trace of pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I tore off a stick that was in his neck, cutting through some of the fat from the oil with a paper knife,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the stick was returned, and I only felt a pricking sensation on my finger.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and this arrow is great of a turquoise arc, that is to say, it is lighter than the ears; the game was sound, and there came no bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And shot an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic to the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I let them grow beards, and I hid them until they were shot, and the Christians remained sound.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I shot an arrow at a man, which was an arrow of death, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then let it pass for .xxx. days, unless it changes its condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut off the arrow and extracted it, and tied it tightly, and I did not leave a bad mark.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if there is a hole in one's heart where an arrow has passed through, and the wound is closed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and let the arrow rest within it, and do not change its natural state,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	There is no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I see another man, to whom an arrow struck in the face and was seared;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And it stayed there suffering great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And he threw an arrow at the king of the nobles, who was hit in the eye with an arrow.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and there was one declining to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat it after it had been shot three days earlier. I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I treated it with a strong substance, and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt tingling and pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on him the plaster of the attariffic digestive, so that his legs do not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I felt his legs from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on him the plaster every day, and quickly heal the wound, and prolong the life of the patient.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he feels the arrow .i. inside his body; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a corrosive aqueous medicine by hand, as long as it was open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was fixed in place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied to the opening of the wound the corrosive medicine, as long as the tip of the arrow was clearly visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and properly define the terms before .iiiij months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then stretch it if the wound that I put the pliers on, and pull from both sides, and cannot get out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I stopped from subtlety and devising of tools, until I took .i day with well-made pliers,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to this person whose form will come at the end of this chapter of chalk, until I stretched it, and brought back the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And I tell you, the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or you have said the quality of extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your cure on those which I do not say, for the books cannot take all into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the master healers compare a very small number of things, and on those that are present and weakling.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	true there are nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign matters which come in this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs except by the following nine ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and those that go out by the side where they enter, are arrows going into their flesh, and do not go out at any time nowadays.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not go out now, let it stay until the flesh is rotten inside, and the exit is cured;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let it stay like this for some days, and change it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then let it go out, and if it does not go out, let there be a small hole everywhere inside the flesh, as long as the inside of the leather is wide, and then treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said to open the patient: if you do not draw it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow comes just to the sinews, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is lodged only in the muscle, and goes just to the sinews,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and let the patient stay for some days without any bad accident, if the machine of pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very badly broken and cannot be taken out, then administer hot tar as I told you; then cure the joint until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is reinserted into the neck of the body so that it cannot be seen, and one seeks it with all one's strength;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, and if you treat it with any suitable tool;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by stretching out the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if there is no bone, nerve or vein, then the wound must be very large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	so that the bone is broken at one of its ends, where the arrow is lodged,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully try to break the arrow, so that you might pull it out with more pain.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then take it back to the place where the arrow is located, and try again, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain of the extraction makes you faint, then administer what we have said in this chapter about the cure with its ointment.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and to guard against injury to the nerve and the vein, and place it so that you can remove the arrow without danger;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or is dried or cooked well or firmly or thoroughly; and place the patient in accordance with the form he was in when the arrow entered;
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do that, then place it according to what your sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from elsewhere, where it opens nothing, or the leather is swollen in place so that it can be seen or felt apart:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Therefore, cut it off as long as the jaws can take hold of it, and then extract it: if not, do so now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly as long as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	If it cannot be extracted, let it go for a while, and then begin the extraction again as long as it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrow in it, shoot it out completely.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he has a fever, and you see that it is not administered, then administer it with an instrument made of wood,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the wood of the instrument; and then pour out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is cut, pour out the instrument with the point entering it, to rejoice in the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow touches, so that you cut all the cart around where the poison is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	and then treat the wound as he thinks fit.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is in the neck or back or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it, then you cover it; if you don't,
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, that is a job.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows is like an eye, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the pliers for cutting hair is also like the feathers of an owl, and here is that form:
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	For in order to cut the tip of an arrow, as it is in this shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of pliers for gripping and for holding so as to be:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which one heals are: xxvi., from which there is a head of xvi.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is a medical text in Old French, and the line you provided translates to: "It is known that: .iij. batans (veins) which are after the ears, which are called the 'douz herbech'."
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the 19 arteries that are in the 19 temples appear;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the 19 veins that are in the 19 arms of the hairs, which are called "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the 19 veins that are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the .ij. veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the .ij. veins that are on the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly talked about are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the one is the cerebral, and it lies on the left side of the body, and it is called by the lay people "voinne du chef";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the pain is called "fast", and is composed of the cerebral and bazal.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "vein of comfort"; and the bazal if it is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "vein of the belly", and is in the light.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and this is the one that is heard, which opens clearly on top of the chest.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little finger is the vein between the thumb and the index finger, and if it is at .ij. inches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the foot are .iij. veins: one is at the edge of the pocket of the left cheek,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are .iij. veins beside those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The pain in the veins that are behind the ears, if it is helped by the ancient catarrhs, and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the disease, as I have told you, are that you remove the head of the sick person,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the spot where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then hold the neck of the patient with a vise,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	while the .i. veins appear behind the ears in .i. two lines depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	"Then take the lance and pierce through the vein until you hit bone, then lift your hand up to where the vein emerges from the upper arm."
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	"And cut and bind the flesh and the vein very carefully. Make two cuts through the skin and the vein, and then pull it away from the meat as much as you can see."
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	"Then stretch and tie it, so that it is healed."
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and cauterization of the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is old Migraine,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and headache, and blindness used to be, and in the eyes tears;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the patient is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and let the patient strip his neck until the veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and put on a poultice of ash and then sign with salt;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	and then apply hot poultices to your chin and neck; and then take a needle and thread, and tie it tightly around the vein at the top of your index finger, and cut the thread,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and then cut the vein above, and tie it up, as you did in the other 15 veins, and make a hole with your finger according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	and then lay down the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein at the forehead is as effective as the healing of the facial diseases of old, and for headaches and torments.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	and take the instrument which is called 'trowel', whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let out blood according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then cut off the neck of the patient, and tie up the vein until it is stable, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame may break when it is thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The saint blood that is in the two veins of the face, help with hair, and with scrofula, and with redness, and with the oil of the ear, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of his blood is that the patient should pull out his tongue by twisting it with no chain, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then he shall suck blood, and let his blood flow a little from the tip of the flame, a little wide, because there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if his flame is thin, by chance if it is broken; then he shall make the blood run, as much as you need, and then he shall lay it on a cotton wool, and he shall lay it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The sick person of the birth pangs is worth water, and also sudden fever, and diseases of the face.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as migraine and pain that comes in the face, and even when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the sickness is such that the patient twists his neck, then pulls his navel towards his left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a long, subtle flame, and put it in the space between the i-ith nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well now, and the blood will begin to flow soon.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not apply too much heat, and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	are the seven principal diseases:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of health is that the patient extracts his hair from both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and the master standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts with .i. scissors,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then cut the vein from the long side a little widely, then tie up the blood vessels temporally, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another in the other vein, then loosen the knot, and extract the blood vessels gently,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of the limbs
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Of the healing of the mouth and its ailments, including gingival problems, lip defects, and mouth ulcers and their treatment.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of this healing are to have the patient sit before you, and to hold his neck as I have described.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	and turn the lip, and look at .ij. veins, one is on the right lip and the other is on the left
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and know by this that they are black, and by this that there are small veins near them that are black:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then know both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then choose the larger of the two, and do likewise with the 2 veins that are above and below, for this is a similar way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the heat of salt water, the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Of the heat of salt water, the tongue so helps after the heat of the head, and it is to the extraction of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the doctor is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and he lifts up the tongue, and looks in each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So then heal one and the other, and do not become too perfect, for the veins are black.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins which are commonly treated are done so according to .ij. ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where cut with sharp flame or small oil droplet, and is called 'aneil'.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is named as it is, and is wide as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is a skill to open the veins that are thick with blood, which is evident and troubled.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle in point, and it is to save the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cure for the basilic, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases of the throat, collar, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to wash the wound, and to bind up the artery that is severed.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he stops the artery, and blood comes from the cut, if it is necessary to stop the blood flow, as I said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be struck with fire, but cut in a way like this.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the base is not clearly visible, then it is necessary that you extract it and change it.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	If you see any bleeding from it, or if you feel pain at its base, you will need to cut into the vein in order to save the arm. It is clear.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and hold the fire to the wound, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you can see the site of the injury, then it is necessary to extract the arm, touching the site until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the site with chalk, and then cut the arm off, holding the fire to the wound.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not wound in the artery when you see the edge open, for it is in the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	and if you see coming up above as urine of a child, and the sap is red and thin, know that it is sap of an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then hasten you, and put your thumb on it for a long time, then open your thumb so that the sap comes out, for this often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	lie down, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if he does not stop bleeding, and the medicine is not present, if you cut the artery, for the head of the retort stops it; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take an bark of fennel, and cut it, and take one of the halves and tie it well until the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If he stops bleeding, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops blood, as we have said,
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of blood is not done in many ways for the small size of the wound and the ability of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The blood of a vein is to be drawn when treating with the head of a staff, and the base of the neck.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it is composed of the bazille and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the surgeon must be careful of the nerve that is exposed, and if he cuts too much, it will split the nerve;
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the patient's health is compromised, and perhaps it cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then you must take away the tool from him; and avoid this nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the cerebral wound with fire, so that it is attracted to the head and held in place;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to heal with fire the wound of the cerebrum, because it is attracted to the head and held in place; and it is necessary to use olive or tin flame, for it is the most healing of all the veins, since it does not destroy the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	But nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the lighter cure first, and do not worry if one fails at first time, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the limbs of some men swell up, but it does not matter if it fails the first time, but there is no harm in that.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is as you think it is.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about a healer is that healing should only be undertaken to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent the diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the surgeon make the cut in one of the three veins that are located on the head, which is to say, the cephalic, facial, and basal vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the surgeon must prepare in advance by fasting for three days and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and the surgeon must prepare on the first day or third day, after 2 hours or 3 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The saint who is free from disease has no fixed fever, but whenever he needs to eat or drink, at all hours and in all seasons.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary to keep the children until they are .xxiii. years old, and women except for four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And it is not necessary to sanctify those who have passed the age of .lxi. years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when any one is sanctified, in whatever way it may be, if it is necessary that he defile the entrails of a light clister,
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	s’il a mouth of fins retained, so that the veins do not attract the intestines the superfluities porries harmful to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	not heal at all those who are too sunburned by meat, nor those who are drunk, as much as it is necessary, nor those who drool;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and so heal after a colic passion, and vomiting, and stomachache, and multiple childbearing, and sleeping, and fasting, and this all the virtue, or by a weapon or the heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	and then subtly the humors, it is thick outside, by meat and by drinkings and by medicines, if you have any doubt about it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	and between or bath, if anything offends him, for subtilely offend him blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal the wound from within by the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect him from work, food, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be tied and jointed, and be higher than he who heals him, and rub his arms .ii or iii times,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then remove the ligature by means of a slight pull, for when it is too tight or loose he cannot run without;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	and then soak the wound with a little of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein for a moment or two;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not run and does not bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run like strings, and if they are such that they are easily winded up,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	So that when one puts it on fire, if one takes it off fire, and cannot open the vein, then it is of this type;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too tight, so that the surgeon must be warned in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if it begins again after a while either on the field or in hospital, if the injuries are inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if his arm is swollen, and the patient expects, let him stay .i. day or .ij., and do not tie up his arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	So that the abscesses may come out; do not go into a bath, but begin to sweat if it pleases you;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if his fracture is small, or the pain subtlety and you doubt that it will not be as much pain as you see, so firm in this fracture right to all flame;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And work a little hospital, so that the arm is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound open, then don't put salt on it, but put a little oil on it, for it softens the course of the blood in this wound and is moisten by this oil that lies there.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then apply the oil to each wound that you heal the veins, so as to stop up the course of the blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and then it also makes a three-edged and beaked awl when it is put on the wound; if it is too large, then it splits gently when it is put on.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a big abscess, which often comes, moreover when it is not healed only once or twice but when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hurry, and put on the bed a wet sponge of water and of linen a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the flow of blood from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any bruising or discoloration, then it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh made into a juice of calamus, or mirrhe, or some sort.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is incision and appearance in the site of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat everyone with the amount of medicine that matches his virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it run until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are sick and need bloodletting, make the wound larger, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to cure them little and often, and they must be cured by cutting across, not by stabbing;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this way of curing is saved from the decay of blood and the severing of nerves, and it is better than the long cure or the broad cure.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to those whose course requires curing, it is necessary to give moist wine in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, if they have a strong smell of blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of a cold complexion, if before the cure moist wine is given in muscatel syrup, or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it arrives at the head, after the flow of blood, it is appropriate that he hums a brew of wine, and a subtle scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or paste of syncope for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up his stomach contents, and sometimes gets better again, but it is appropriate, when it is weakened by great pain, that he heal little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he vomits up his stomach contents after the first pain, and he is very strong, but he heals after .vij hours after the first pain, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who is to be healed on another side, if it is necessary to heal him the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has blood accumulation within the body which is already warmed and brings fever. If so, there is a need to extract large quantities and widen the breach as much as possible with small blows on the bone;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you should treat all the conditions for healing, and put your hand on his pulse as it heals, so that death does not come from the hole;
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and if this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not right when you see the arm dislocated, and make the blood come out a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firm upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if he is broken, that he extends the arm carefully, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be until the second time he heals; or you put to the tip of the flame as long as the blood that is frozen to the hole of the vein comes out;
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place on it a little of salt water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is infected, let it alone and do not bind it, as long as the abscess is subsiding.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing out the blood a second time, whether it is in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is drawn out at the arm's base, not at its tip, because it is composed of a different nature.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of drawing out the blood so is that the patient holds his hand in warm water until it turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then cut it off with a sharp knife, so that the vein appears clearly, then tie it now with a knot, not wide nor long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the wound open widely, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and do not draw it out, but put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water, as long as you have enough of it.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is cold, do not put the hand in warm water, for one puts it in more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein, since it does not have an artery or a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The salvation of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and it is as follows:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Draw out the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein has gone, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and bend it across, and cut it all off, if it doesn't hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't cut too much in the middle, because the nerve are very thin all the way down;
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put back the hand in hot water, it is not unwrapped from the wound, and cannot be taken out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and thread to sew it firmly together, and do the same for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The surgeon should then go to the left side of the patient and make an incision, following the path of the disease, and do the same on the right side as I have told you.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The surgeon should then go to the left side of the patient and make an incision along the spine, following the path of all the diseases that are located below the corset.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As for the diseases of the mare's milk, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the cubs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is such that the patient drinks some warm water, and rubs the vein until it stops.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and rub the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it with fire, so that the skin is burned off and the wound is clean; and let the flame go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get it out, put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you treat it for the first time, start the second time above a little, because the leg is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its sap is the pain in the thigh, when it is for blood heat.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of this sap is that the patient goes or bath, and pulls out from the ankle .iii. days in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that you can put your finger on all sides, and crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and worth more than you can imagine, because the leg is out, and it is very red when it is moved by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not heal it, neither does any rain of him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little day, and keep away from the wells.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and do so much to the blood that you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put cotton on it and tie it up; now he is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Wound suction with a pump
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Vacuum wounds with a pump are made from horns, or bronze, or glass; and vacuum therapy is performed in one of two ways: by injuring and drawing out blood, or without injuring.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation which is not to hurt if so .ij. ways: or it is all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation that is made by hurting and by extraction of blood if made in .xiiij. parts of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	of which one is all at the top of the body; and others are in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and .ij. others on .ij. sides of the neck; and the windpipe is above the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the vacuum of the shoulders; and the vacuum above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the vacuums of the arms; and the vacuums of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the vacuums of the ankles; and the vacuum treatment does not work for big veins, but only for small ones that are scattered throughout the body.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore do not try this on anyone who has a large vein, as you would with a small one.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be anesthetized, or with any fire or heat, in any disease that comes from over-fullness, until the whole body is voided.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if for necessity of disease it is necessary to vaporize, or by habits, if we anesthetize each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and vomit and in each period;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they need to vaporize, become very heavy;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who have repulsion and blush in their face, and in their hair, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and thirst for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such who dream, and see nothing but blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and especially when it is nearly midnight, we order that you should not breathe for 3 hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saint of music helps with the headache in the head ... that comes to the eyes, and does not come except after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation if it is in place of the blood of the cerebral,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	nor does it concern anyone of cold complexion who uses it, or who has had a fever, for that does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it does not concern anyone who is ill with a cold or who has recently had a fever;
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are recovering from such an illness often become confused, and for that reason the fire cautery should be placed a little further down by the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The wind-sucking enters the throat at the tip of the tongue and because of this it goes towards the extraction of the bone.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in splitting the channel of the palm, and all, and filling;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to push it back, because if it holds too firmly, then by chance or stomach or body.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The wind-sucking causes three pains in the neck: one at the tip of the tongue, and another at the throat, and another at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is in the place of the shrine of the basilica; and it comes that you command to the saint that he expresses his hand to put, that he does not grasp the artery, and does not come running with blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds from the north bring with them diseases of the mouth and decay of the gums, and similar diseases that come to the mouth; and they are in the place of the shrines of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds from the shoulders bring with them a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The winds from the neck bring as much as from the three veins of the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For blood draws from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And command the surgeon not to sew it too tightly, for the vein is bare of hair and can easily split the skin and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back so fits well to the foundation, and to the abscesses, and it must be large and of iron, for its work is to milk well; and perhaps, if it were too thin, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs so easily open, for they draw blood from all the body, and are good for old pains of the joints, and of the toes, and of the bladder, and remove flowers; and they are in the place of the .ij. sophenes, and of the .ij. cheeks, and moreover they weaken the body after long use, and bring about many diseases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	"And if the wound is large, then you must cut it twice: first to open up the deep part of the wound with a sharp instrument."
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	"And if the wound is very thick, then you must cut it three times; and when we want to extract the arrow point by point, we must only pull lightly once."
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	"And if we want to extract the arrow from the wound, then let's do it often; and if the wound is thick, then we must pull hard, and the end should be that the arrow comes out suddenly,"
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and cover with those who have thick skin and tough, that you oil the wells of the suckers of oil-opening and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of oil purple, or of oil of sweet almonds, or of oil of seed of melon;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the state of a goat, of oil of sorrel, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if one has a sore that is tender and swollen, then there is no need to put oil on it.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it should be washed after the inhalation of red water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or porcelain water, or other similar water.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if one has moisture, if it rises like this, or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And if one has large excesses, they rise with old wine, or water of oak, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and is not suitable to go into a tub before the bath or take a bath; but after the bath an hour or two and does not sleep after the ventilation,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he warm up, when he should be ventilated and when he has been ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against those who are coleric, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he prunes cold things, like pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and mint, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and also small fish, and a chariot with wheels, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion, if they drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and small fish and birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and let him drink more than he eats when he becomes winded;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three times or four times a day before or after the wind, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be careful with the sun, but it is good for those who are hot to drink water.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leech that is used to hurt is that which is put on the liver, and the midge, and the podagra, and on the belly and the bowels and the rain and the hound, for that member does not suffer to be hurt on the skin,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not make it except to attract blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put on the breasts when the baby is sick; for the viscosity that is in the member, as we put on leeches on the belly and the bowels to ease the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and bone the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if by its virtue it attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and so does this, when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is repressed wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are emptied only for sucking; and never are they together empty, and never is there a plainness of water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as such as the diseases of the lungs, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this;
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup is administered to fire thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be 3 inches wide and half a palm long, and it should have a small hole in the center about as big as a needle is inserted into
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be of brass, smooth before so that it does not hurt the patient when put on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and it has in the middle a crossbar of brass or iron, to put a candlestick between
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and let there be great and small ones according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of the thin from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And this suction cup must be placed on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the wax candle or .i. liquid, and put it in the center of the suction cup at the base of the member that is placed in the center of the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and your two are on the hole that we have said, so that when you see it, if there is steam, and then take off the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the lining away as before, and restart it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup that is adapted for pleurisy, with all water, there is no thread or hole, and it is only adapted when it is flat with water, and put on the member only slightly;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	are not opened except in limbs where it is impossible to put a suction cup because of their smallness, as in the mouth and gums, and similar parts;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare legs, if there are two or three toes, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of use so that when you find suction cups that are in clear, non-muddy water, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a sweet water nut, as long as they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleaned from the vein and the suction cup, and then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clear, and they cheer up, if it is possible to put a suction cup there, you put it there, because this is worth trying again later;
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If that doesn't work, then lift the head up from there, and then dip it in water, very well, and then squeeze it out;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if he leaves it too long after the heart of the saplings, so that moisten .i. a linen sheet in cold water and put on it, until the sap is dried up;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are many saps, then put on them crushed vitriol or scurvy and similar things, until they are dried up;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on half of boiled peas, and leave them until they burn at the heat, so now they will be dried up;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more work to do, then take other saplings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the blood does not want to come out, so rub the place of the vein with fresh blood, or you put an needle into it as long as there is blood out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then place them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they become numb;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are crying, so powder on a little aloes and rosewater, or ash, if they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapters of this treatise are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and are the restoration of broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear son, that the wise men never wrote of this chapter, nor did they read any letter or book about it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I have never found any good book about it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, from which I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter the contents of the balm, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly set forth the forms of the tools that are prepared, as I did in the previous twenty chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the summary of the words and the chapters where the mind of man takes refuge and stays on truth, so that those who are proven can learn and teach this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or torsion or strain in any part of the body, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from both sides, unless something prevents it from happening, as weakness of the trunk, or paralysis, or age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the tension is too great or too frequent; and mild cold winds, and a carriage made of wood and leather, and do not drink wine, nor drink any fatty foods, and do not fill the joints with food, until you have no doubt about the aphorism, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the disease returns to its first government that it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meat that is very fattened, or viscous like cooked wheat, and rice, and peas, and cakes of milk, and oil, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with very fat meat the break is repaired more quickly and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and the infirm cannot be repaired or strengthened according to their nature by the heat of the members, nor those which are too soft, as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but do not cure, repair on the broken bone. i. large tender meat that hardens and joins the member together, as much as it is necessary; and do not at all cure it with thin meat, and for this reason we have said that it is necessary to feed it with thick meat.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breakers are many and varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is another than the break of the leg, or of the arm, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes up, and another that goes down, as when the blade of a pen is sharpened to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that makes a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each has his own way of preparing it, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is cured by turning the bone, and opening it well from both sides, and pressing it with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no torsness or twiste in the bone, and the patient feels no great pain, it is not broken;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may have torsness, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but put on medicine that comes later, and then hold it now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that has come in the shoulder, and there are the three parts separated, it is now necessary to put them together equally, so that the abscesses come forward.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the abscesses come forward, so that the shoulder is at rest for a day or two, as long as the abscesses are calm.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then put it together equally with the medicine that you can use easily and cleanly, and know that the restoration of the shoulder is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it, as it comes later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if it is four parts, it is hand or foot, or with your hand a small member, or with four strings, or with one string and with your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you remove all additions from their places as much as possible, and keep so that by your work there is no injury or pain for the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and set well together the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not yet right: if the dressing is done well and does not come off too much, do not press it so much as those who work with fire and contraction at the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are set in place, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither while waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the limbs be so secure that they feel no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when one feels no pain, then it is set in place, and the disposition to move must be such that one feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and guard well that it be placed correctly, so that there is no tortuosity when it is reset.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and resembling things: it is necessary to wrap linens of molls and subtle ones.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are thick, such as feet and legs: it is necessary to wrap a wide and sturdy linen, for the wide linens embrace all of the large member, and constrain it evenly from all sides, so that there is no stain.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then he stooped lightly, 2 or 3 times or according to the member, and tightened his hand a little at all the joint, then went up over the fracture and tightened it less, so that the fracture then moves a little away from the fracture.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the joint a little and a little, until you press much of the sound place, then take again .1 other joint and turn in chief over the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go back to the sound part of the fracture, and tighten it a little way, not too strong or too lightly, as we have said in the first step above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the light joints of linen or drapes, until it is all even, then lay it all above .1 bend, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or an inflammation, place on it a warm thing to soothe the inflammation and let it remain like that for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then extract it from your joints, and let them be half a foot long, or from a pole that is used to make cleats, or from palm fronds, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the stake that one puts on the fracture is a little larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it on the staples also as you did at first, then tie up one side with a thread going forward, like in the first case on the breach.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	then make it narrower again, less so; and let the thread be fine, not too thick nor too thin, and let it be made of wool;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is too thick, as I would want for works of the fools who make string-like ropes with linden wood, and that is a great mistake, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it only deserves to have between each staple half the distance of two inches.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pricked by the staples of the joints after they have been stripped, then he should be wrapped in linen, or woollen cloth, so that he does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to extract all the members of a broken body on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, it is not good to put on stirrups before 2-3 days or more according to the severity of the abscess, especially if hot;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and here is the way of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour so that it holds the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this confect, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring the fracture to various dispositions, especially for women and small children, for it is not good to be too fine or too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Autre maniere d'emplastre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. Z.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. Z.; acaice vi. Z.; bolic armenic .x. Z., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d'uef, et l'aministre.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Autre manière d’emplastre qui vaut à desévrez de leurs lues, et apaise la douleur soudainement, et le taille utilisent de l’os, et la briseure : pren lainne novele, et la moille en aissile et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cet emplastre ne restaure miie, mais il est bon pour apaiser d’apostème chaud, et ostre proprement les douleurs.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-p avol leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of plastering broken bones and to reduce the remaining swelling at the root of the aposteme. Take roots of mallow, chamomile, violets, timothy grass, each in equal parts; grind them together, and confound them with wine, and heat the limbs, then confound them with coriander seed water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plastering broken bones, which is more effective than the first one, when the swelling at the root of the member comes to rest. Take roots of mallow and linseed, borage, melilot, and marsh mallow, and violets and chamomile, each in equal parts; grind them together, and confound them with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its need for rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras states that for the restoration of a broken member, one should not put anything but wax and oil on it, and nothing else; he also says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galien says that we must put hot things on the broken member to restore it, dry things, as mirr, aloes, incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plasters which is useful for lesions and pain: take wool or hair of the same size, or feathers of birds, and bone marrow, and yarn evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster with it and lay it on him.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then let him lie a little while, and take care that the patient feels no pain, or that his bones do not move from their places; but let him lie by day.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or restlessness or swelling, then take care to remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and wet it with sea water, and dip it in fresh water, and raise it up, until the itching ceases, and the pain is allayed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	and leave the limb to rest for an hour, then put on another dry, wet with water or oil and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure that the abscess is hot.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and rest the inflammation of the limb, and ease the pain, then begin again gently, and a little plaster, and do not extract it as strongly as before; and gently until he is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot, redness, pain, and swelling have all disappeared, then you should begin again, as you did before, with the plaster and binding.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if the limb does not come back as described above, then do not remove the plaster and binding until after 2, 3, or 5 days have passed; and do not leave it on for more than 10 days, according to what you see, as long as the wound is breaking open, and the treatment approaches that of the char.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And then restrain him more than first, and let him fatten his flesh, as I said before; and if you see that he is getting wet above what is necessary, know that natural sweat cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then let the hot water arise for him, every time you dislodge him, and this be every third day, and wash a little by the hour;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	for this dislocation let the member be cut short, and gently remove what the twisted limb has made, which is wrong; it is unpleasant, and if there is a lot of it, I see no other way but to let it drop and perform the operation correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breaking are there, and various forms, and the causes are diverse.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for it has breaks that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone all the way down to the shoulder which is out of place, as if it were broken or not; and for this reason this type of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For the sword pierces the bone from above, and this type of break is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two great breaks or from a small one.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is an enclosed impact, or a crack, or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that touches the membrane which is on the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has broken through the bone as thin as a hair, and this break is small, and therefore it is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by stone, or by hitting, or by a similar thing, and it enters the bone, and the shank becomes bent as the blacksmith does to the kettle when he strikes it on the kettle; or if it enters between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And if there is more than one joint affected, so that the head of the bone is wet with moisture, as the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and all these types of fractures, which are feared for small pieces as they are; and I will speak in his place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the types of fractures by traction on them, and inquiry at their ends, and by the broken cart which is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known because when one discovers the bone, and rubs it up, then opens the fracture blackly.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the disease, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of reason, extension, palmsiness, and feverishness, and the eyes become red and white, and other similar signs in many diseases, then it cannot be cured doubtfully.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an accidental prediction, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the baby is born first with you, and it is in winter, then you must break the bone before the fourteenth day at the most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hurry to break the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh does not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break in the bone comes just to the hair that covers the skull, you must split the part split thus: and it is that you press the head of the patient, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and the pain of a wound leads to discovering the bone, or an abscess, so help him with that which is appropriate, and it is that you fill the place with wet rags soaked in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calmed, and are sure of the pain of the wound; then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done according to 1 . i j ways: one way is that you chop at the narrowest end in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I cut another length that is larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several different lengths, some narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and are made of iron; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it from within, so that you also prepare it with files, not completely so that it does not pierce beyond the bone of the testicle, and must have on top of the tip a margin or.i. circle, so that the tip does not pass beyond the bone; and it is necessary that you have more, so that each comes to its place of the end of the bone, so that you have files for all testicles; and this is the form of the three ways of filing:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And the quality for piercing within the bone is that you place.i. file on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced; then remove the file a little bit further, and do so everywhere, then cut off the space of the bone which is between the pits, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools that you have, like pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the syph.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, if it is necessary that you retain the apex which is retained by the bone from all.i. other tool resembling a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more soft and finer than the other scalpel:
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it does not delay any of the small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is slightly broken with instruments; then cure the wound with tent and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of cauterizing is what Galen says, which is more effective; and he holds it very firmly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens; so that when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped scalpel, from which comes this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side, and is the part of ague in 2.i. sides, so that the trenching is toward the bone; then fier with a small mallet on, so that you chop lightly the bone all around, and give yourself well guard from the fabric that desoz;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is broken through the bone, then let the bone be made light, for the bone that is broken well does no harm, and there is no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone is broken only to the tendon, and the bone is cut a little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover that roughness with a sharp razor of which you must have different quantities, in order to adapt them according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are large pieces, then start with coarser razors, and then use finer ones, without stopping until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each different type of cut and subtle fracture, you must adapt your razor according to the shape; and this is something that has not been fully answered by those who have studied this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the healing is done with a poultice, then you should squeeze out .i. linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another cloth doubled up in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and oil, and put it on top of the first drapeil; and make this lighter than you can, so that you do not damage the healing, then add a third linen cloth, and do not remove it until it has soaked the wound completely;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it for a day or two until the abscess has healed, then remove it, and add to it roots of herbs, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and alchemical substances, and similar things; from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and add to it medicinal substances without any taste of bitterness;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and be sure that the wound is clean, so you should not leave it oozing, nor should you let it gather dust, for when blood gathers on the cloth above the head, if it gets into the wound and comes out again, it will cause great harm to the patient; because when you put a bitter substance on top of healing, it may be harmful if it gets inside.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, that no bad accident comes upon the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness comes upon the patient only because of the medicine which we have put on him, of which it is said that it has virtue, then you should press out one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one scoop of resin, and lay it on the medicine.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat in the manner which is appropriate for his illness until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the six joints of the neck are never broken when one falls on them, for these are six bones; and this cartilage is not broken unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the 19 parts is broken, it is necessary that you press your little finger or thumb in place of the nail, and make even this break inside your index finger, and at the knuckle away from the nail, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do so lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	and if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and it cannot come back to its place, it is necessary that you make even the tip of a small piece of hair.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	and if the break is in two parts, if you do not restore it right away, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscesses are calm, then bind to the head with linen bandages, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another to another part, if the break is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the apertures of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And say that one should not moisten the bandages in oil, and each day; it does not seem to me that this is good, but it seems that they are moistened with sheep's fat and powder of molasses; then leave the bandage, until the bone is hard and the joints hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never bind neck wounds with goose feathers in place of bandages, and if it is so warm that the wound breathes, and holds the breach open, and blows upon the patient; or else do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come up near the birth, while you are working, put cotton or a wet cloth in oil, or in .i. a little of water-weed.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come up, put a plaster on the skin, of flour and si-samen, and powdered incense, cooked with honey from bees, then put a light cloth on it, and do not tie it tightly around the birth;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the birth is small and broken into small pieces, so extract them with suitable tools for this, then cut it in half, and treat it with suitable ointments and oils for this;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no pain inside the birth, so treat it with suitable remedies, and put strings of thread on it, until it is healthy again.
de la routure de la mandibule	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very severe, and it is not broken in two, except that it is bent inward, then one should take care lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side, insert your index finger from the right hand, and push the break inward lightly, and make it even with the other hand, pushing outward.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is of degree III, then it is necessary that you maintain an extension of III parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the pains move from within, or a rupture, if they are pulled from a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a cerote, and put on .i. double cloth; and on the cloth put a large, well-made stake, or a piece of leather that is long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it to the hook you have, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, if it relaxes on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply plaster, of flour from the mill with a lot of egg or flour from wheat, after having taken out the cerote; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster dries, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times are healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses burst, if you apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, take out the piece of bone that is broken; if the fracture is subtle, use the appropriate tools for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then make it broader with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and do not delay at all, if the wound is wide, put on it plasters suitable for that, so as to avoid infection, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	of the force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	of the shoulder
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the repairs if it is when the fracture is without pain that you have 2 ministers, so that one bleeds him the shoulder that feels the broken force; and the others extends the neck toward the part; then place equal the fracture at your sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor hair.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have more to extend it, so put on the shoulder of the patient a round spike made of cloth or linen, and make it large according to your need; and stretch and hold the broken force, and hold the spike in your hand, so that you place equal the fracture, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from behind, because it is broken, then let the patient lie down on his back, and put the shoulder under one ear, and hold the minister's shoulder forward, so that the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the fracture at your sides, and if you find it difficult to split it, so let it split easily; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join because of any obstacle, so put on the instrument that is near to the patient.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and appears like a spoon, and is not a nail, and should be as large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has .ij. chisels, if you see, and one is wide, and the others are narrowed, like the breaking of the wound that you made when you treated the bone;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of the abscess, if the wound breaks, and the rupture is small, or you doubt about the abscess, if it covers the wound with cloth and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you soak .i. drape in oil and ash and wine, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when there are wounds and no cuts, is that you put on the bone the powder from the mill and ash of egg, and place light staples on it, and place a spike in the socket if you need one;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	puis prenez une très grande bande d'une palme de large, puis mettez .i. drapeil double sur les épaules, et le fustragez; puis prenez une estele fine de .iij. doigts de large et de long, et l'enveloppez autour de celui bendeil, de sorte que la tête du bandage soit suspendue;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	then take a very long band of palm width, then put .i. drapeil double on the shoulders and splint them; then take an estele (small thin stick) of 1.5 fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that splint so that the head of the splint hangs down; and place the estele on the break, and loop the bandage around the neck, and secure the shoulder at a healthy angle, and secure the shoulder joint with the bandage; and then remove each part, and when you see that the splint holds well in front of the break, and you can see clearly that the estele does not move from above the broken bone, then you should adjust it every day, and when you feel that the neck is loose, then release the restraint slowly.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and let the patient sleep on his side, and put 1/4 of a palm width between the shoulder and the collar, to support the dislocation; so that the break is kept stable by the shoulder being supported, or the neck is held at an angle by the bandage around the neck, and this does not cause any problem unless there is a sudden movement, until 20 days have passed.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then restart the splinting, if you think it is necessary, and secure it and leave it like that until it has healed; and it is healed in about 26 days, and some men heal in less time.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	de la brisure de l'épaule
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If there is a piece of the bone that comes forward, and do not remove the seam, then mend it as we have said in the chapter of mending an abscess with hot wax.
de la brisure dou pis	de la brisure de l'épaule
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocated shoulder should be reset as soon as possible to prevent further injury and pain for the patient. To reset the dislocation, the patient should lie down on their back and have their arm dangling over the edge of the bed. The doctor will carefully move the arm, trying to return it to its normal position. If this does not work, or if there is pain or an abscess at the joint, the patient should be taken to a surgeon as soon as possible. The surgeon will use corrosion or pruritus, applying heat or pressure to the joint to loosen it and then carefully move the arm back into place. Once the shoulder is reset, the patient should be immobilized with a splint or cast to prevent further injury while the joint heals.
de la brisure des costes	the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	says that the break in the ribs only occurs in large bones near the back, and at the top towards the center, and feels good to inquire about it.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And let it be even if you make the break even, as is right. And then put on the plaster, and restrain it with a splint, if you need one.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break is in the ribs and goes inward, then the patient feels great pain and sharp pain as well, like to cry, because the bone rubs against the membrane; and it causes great vomiting of blood, and this is a sign of bad health, and the old one has put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of those who serve to administer meats that swell the belly, to push the break out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, because hot abscesses do not come, unless they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if he has come, then let him heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that no one should put ventosas on the spot, for it seems reasonable, but there is doubt that the ventosas will not attract the excesses to the place of weakness by their disposition of fragility.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one should cover the spot with another dry cloth dipped in oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the area even, then it is cured with the cure for plague, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain in the bone that touches the fabric, then doubt is on the patient; so it is necessary to split at the base of the broken rib, and to put there 10 ounces of iron instrument to ward off the sickness; and afterwards, one must cut the bones, and pull them lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound together, if they are large, and treat them with unguents until they are healed. And if the abscesses come out, then put there drapels dipped in oil, and place them on the spot; and cure while the spot is infected with that which has caused the abscess, and let it rest on the side where it hurts, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes that breaks the bones of the neck, and so it would not happen; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it has come to anyone, and you know that he will be well or not, if you see his hands soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you pinch them with a pin, then do not feel pain. Know that there are many deaths; and if they do not move and do not feel pain when they are stretched, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the sick person is cured, if one puts the cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know that he will be well or not, if you see his muscles soft, and the accident that is in his hands, and on his back it swells and moves without will; and when it has been soothed on its belly, then does not move. Know that there are many deaths; and if it does not move and does not feel pain when it is soothed on its back and does not clench, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the sick person is cured, if one puts the cure on it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you rub if there is an abscess, oil or butter of sheep's milk on it until it calms down; then put one of the poultices comfortingly and drying, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone comes loose, cover it with poultice; then set the bone, and sew the skin together, if it is large, with stitches, then clean the wound with poultice, until it is well; and if the bone of the arm is broken, which is called the "armbone", pour your poultice from your left hand, and put it level with the other hand at your disposal, then apply the poultice and stake it down, if you need to do so; then hold it in place, and if any bones have come loose, push them back together, and cure the wound until it is well.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the break of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip joint is broken, and if so, only a little reduction in the head; and let it be long, and declining to the side, and gives pain to the patient at the site, and makes it swell where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above it; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head, then make it equal to the natural shape as much as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, and it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his back, as much as possible so that the restoration of this break is made known to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, if put upon an axe, then place upon a beam of wood or of timber, and stretch the break, so that it does not move; and employ the place of support on the sides, as long as the position is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his back or sides.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess bursts, if it is not infected, as long as the abscess bursts, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, unless there is some bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay 18 shoulders and ties, and set them high up, and chop the sick on one side; then pour some broken branches into a basket, and set any heavy thing or his ministers down it; then put the knife the same as his hands together, until the cutter returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should put the sick person on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then order 18 ministers that one who is on the cutter's hands should cover what is on the cutter's hands, and the others cover the shoulders, and spread each one in its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then extend 18 shoulders out of the cutter, and on the cutter, and spread each one in its part. And if the cutter is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put a legible tie out of the shoulder, and another one towards the person's side, out of the cutter; and also if the cutter is near the person's side, it is necessary to put a light tie, without effort, until the cutter is level on his own, and then extract him, if the apophs are not closed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the apophs are closed, then do not extract him until 7 days have passed, and put on the cutter a wet and oiled cloth, until the apophs are calm; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the empurplement on the cutter, then assemble the arm on the ajutoire, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back; and put the drapeil, and extract on the arm, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a good position, unless something hinders it, or its bone is broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use a pole, and put on the fracture a pole wider and stronger than the others, and have between each pole 1 . i . two of space, and let each pole be so large that it passes the fracture . iii . two of its parts; then strain on the poles, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the poles and the strain, so as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incision warm, let it rest for seven days, as we said; then look each 1  . i  . day at the knot, that itching does not grow or come to place where it is too tight. If it is done, so as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such an accident does not come, let it be undone after 1   . i  . days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and take off the aid 1  . cussin made of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the bonds; if it is done by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put in a certain way that the food be at the first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is fitting that the aid and the leg should be recovered in 1  . x  . days or more; and then he must be undone and administer baths and medicines of ointments to cure the wound. And if the stricture is ugly and blocked, delay undoing for 1  . jors or 1  . months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of 2 bones, which are called the "humeri", one small and one large, with the smaller one being at the end near the shoulder, and the larger one being below it; sometimes the larger humerus may break by itself, or the smaller one, or sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the smaller humerus is broken, the healing is easy and quick; and when the larger one is broken, it takes longer to heal properly than when it is the smaller one that is broken; and if only the smaller one is broken, the proper thing is to stretch it a little and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the larger humerus that is broken, then he must stretch it more strongly; and place it on .ij. cushions, and tilt the arm up higher than the other arms, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the other ministers' arms to the affected joint at his side, or with .i. band, and another minister at the other end above it. And then make it even according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break-up into pieces, let each one be put back in its place, and if there is no one who can pick it up right away, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do so on the bone, as we have said above.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break-up into pieces, I have spoken of it in the chapter on singular cauterization; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the restoration of the broken joint comes the incision of the aposteme, take care: make a cloth of cerote oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and place the cloth above it subtly, until the aposteme is calmed. Then wipe off the cerote, and put the plaster of the powder of the mill with much ash, then put the splint, and let the splint be closer to the break than any other; and know that it should have vj. splints or more arrangements: whether the break is in one bone or in 2.; and strain it more up than anywhere else, all the time less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on cauterization; and let the cloth be soft and moist that is above the break, and do not make it too hard or too sharp; and let the thread from which it is pulled be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And wait for the member and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itching that comes to the member, let it be soaked in hot water until the itching is calmed; and let the member rest without confinement. And then begin again to strain, and if the ties are soft and the bones seem good, go forward with the treatment.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the joint does not respond [to treatment], so that it is too constricted, then you must soften it [by applying heat] little by little, and leave it like this for a few days, until the joint moves and then hold it fast.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if neither of these things that we have said comes to the patient, so do not loosen him up until .xx. days. And when he is entombed, then he will bend his hands to his neck, and keep his necks even, and guard against movement and turning over, and sleep on his back; and know that this healer is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv. days, perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and towards the two there are few breaks, and only comes a little bit of water many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or rained on, so that the patient should cross his hands and sit straight before him evenly; then he puts his hand on the cloth spread out, and extends the broken bones, and puts them even with the mirror, until they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the staples, if there come an abscess, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1.i. linen drapes.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the back between the belly of the plant, so make a stake of drapes, and instruct the patient that he should strangle it to his broken plant; and then strain out of a long drape, and let the stake of four-fifths be as large as the plant of the hand, and strain it, as it comes.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the end, then you should put a stake above it, and another under the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie them together tightly around the hand, and fasten the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break is at one of the two ends, then you should make it even, as it comes; and hold it with the plant, and see if there is a twinge; and if the break is between the two ends, then you should make it even, and tie it to the healthy end; or you should tie them all together in 1.i. hold, that they do not move, or you put a stake on it, as it comes; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the apothecary carefully, and mend what comes, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	of the broken rib The bone of the rib is often bruised, and we can clearly see it when it comes forward and behind; and the cure is this: you tie one above the break, and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends the ministers of his bond equally to his sides; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the rib, so that one of the links comes forward to the fist, and the other links are behind the break; and also if it is near the knee, and then either put the bandage on the knee, and then extend it upward; then place the mirror on the bone equally on both sides, according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster, and tie it up, so that the apostemes [the joints] do not come forward.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed down and then return to your opening and treatment; the time has come in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, wrap it in a dry cloth, bent double, and wait for the excess to come out; then return the leg as far as the heel comes to the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, freeing the knee from the joint, and bring the thread up; then return to the leg and the thigh with the cloth, and put on the splint, and put an Splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the bandage tightly, forming ii or iii torments on the splint; and as you go higher and higher on the splint, lessen the stretching; then tie on the ii or iii strings that are above, then return to the joint where you brought the thread up, as far as you come away from the foot; and the stretching, if it does not move out of its place, then leave it there, and if it comes back or swells or has any other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it comes out and turns back, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that grab hold, if one can be pulled out, let him pull it out; and if he cannot pull it out, let the joint be split and taken out with force; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no matter how the cloth is wrapped around the hip where we put splints, as for the shoulder and arm; however, in this case, when it is healed, do not strike the hip.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the cut is healed in .1. days, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	For in the joint of the knee there is sometimes little fracture, but it often breaks many times. And if it fractures, it may be just a split, or .1. hole, and feels very painful; and when it does not break, it hurts less.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that if one of its two ends is made equal, as it can be joined together again, then put plaster on it, and put a round bar there, if you need it, and fasten it as we have said for other fractures, such as the ankle and others; put on each accident what is necessary to make it well.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are similar to those of the arm; and for this reason is the restoration as much like that of the arm as possible, and the work is all done
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns around from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, so it turns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, so you feel great pain and see it well; and turn back to dislocate. Then make an extension, and put it equal, and tie the stars equally; but, nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, so the extension is smaller and lighter; and align according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take .ij. fair reeds that purple the leg on one side and another, and be long of the leg from the knee to the foot; then wrap in .ij. leus .i. bonds above and below, and do not let the leg fall back in the center, and at this lieure cannot go down to the right or left, and so it is good; and no one administrates .i. reeds long of the leg, and if they are of reed, and put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do they put them in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if he cures until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot there is a fracture in two places, and only in some cases does it cause pain; and it is necessary to know that there are many reasons for this pain.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones overhang one another, so place this patient flat on the ground, just as if he were going to walk, and then now put your foot on his leg, where the bones have risen, then press them down with great force until they come back into their places; then apply the plaster and stamp it on, and attach a small wooden block to the sole of the foot with 10 flat stones, then secure it in front of the foot, then when you have wrapped him up in blankets, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	After three or four days have passed, if the joint has healed, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, if you set them back in place, just as we have said for the two of the hand; then attach a piece of wood to the broken part according to its length, and make it a little wider, then attach the sole of the foot with the block that I mentioned, and draw it forward; and if there are any more than two or three that are broken, attach a piece of wood to each one according to its quantity, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and draw the block away from the sole of the foot; and let the chief of the block be under the sole of the foot, so that it is well covered.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget any of the other things that I said for the broken ones, whenever we have said it; and take care of each injury as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the bone through the knuckle
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's bone is fractured, if she is set down enlarged, then lean her to the back of the neck, and hold her there; then fill the cavity with cotton, and put in also as much hay as a pound weighs; then turn the woman over, and push the neck up and down, and then let the cotton fall, until it comes to the entrance of the cavity, and the bone returns with the hay; and when she has urinated, if the bone be pushed back, and again when she has urinated, put in the hay, and blow into it, forming it until the hay is gone from within: the fracture will then be healed; then fill it with cotton, and leave it there for some days, until it has healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the knuckle bone of the man or woman is fractured, if it is restored as we have said in the chapter on the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from that one who devotes himself to study and practice, and reads my book. For the fracture indicates many things concerning the right way to restore: hear them now.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vagina, when it is fractured, take a goose's neck and fill the vagina with it; then wrap clothes around it, and leave it there for .iij. jors or so, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	from injury with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have injury with wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the shoulder or arm or limb, let it be healed now, so that the healing which we have spoken about bears witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you may start again to restore the injury at that very hour, or on that day, unless the apothecaries' potions come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the potions come, then you may start again to restore the injury at that very hour, as long as the potions are calm, and don't touch them on the third day or the fourth, for you would bring bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek when uncovered, so that you put it into place with your hand gently, with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not fit your hands so that they are equal in length, then take this iron instrument which is 2.5 inches long and 0.5 or 1 inch wide; and according to the quantity of the wound, you will use it with three or four, according to what is needed for each breaking cure; and let them be thin and a little thick, so that they do not press on the member at your opening, and let them be pointed in front, and thick in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because the broken shoulder should be placed on the top of the apparent bone; and it is tapped once, as long as it revives, and made even one against the other. And if the break is slight, and the instrument cannot easily take hold of the bone, you must chisel the top of the bone until the instrument can have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together, as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, at your disposal; then use this to cut the bone in a direction that is smooth and even.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the jaw is brought back into place, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. If so, then it will be moist .i. drapeil in red wine vinegar, and properly if it is in an estait; and do not put on the wound wax or any other thing where there is oil, lest it should come to putrefaction and corruption; then administer air, when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover all around it according to the quantity of the wound, and do well in guard that the wound is not strained with the break; and many times this has been done by the foolish mirage, and has come upon the sick one or dead or corrupting none of them; and be the extractions more soft and more soft than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a good accident will not come, since we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it does not seem right to put on air; but wrap around, in place of air, hard drapes, and tie them. And when you see after 1 .i. or 1 .ij. day bowe at the wound, if oste that which you have put on all with wine, and i put on poultices healing wounds, as poultices tetrafarmaçon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member 2 times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the bow can run down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if someone hits, and he cannot hold it but it returns to its place, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, so you must open the wound with a probe, and remove all these troublesome pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula appears at the place or any other corruption, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar bones of large limbs, do not pull it out, because many die; but leave it until it putrifies: perhaps it will heal by itself. But if you can't, then let it go.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the bruses that come from the sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come often after the health of the broken, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot do the natural work of the limbs.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if we come to you: if the ministering of medicines is stinky, as is the case with aloe, incense, mirr and sarcacoll, acacia and other things; so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine of stinkiness or with a lot of urine or with honey; and put them on the nodule in piles, and bind them well, and do not release them in hand for many days; and then release it, and begin again another, until the nodules are hardened; or you release it on a piece of plaster very well made; because the property of the plaster is that it hardens all the swelling on the limbs; and if the nodule has already become hardened like stone, it needs to be cut, if the flesh is removed above it, and the superfluity appears; or you take it to any barber, until it has been hardened, and cure it until it has healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member that is weak after the gaol
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and there remain weak and delicate members after gaol: either because they were too tightly bound, and were not bound as they should have been; or because they had too many bindings, and could not receive the circulation of the blood to the member; or because of many wounds; or because there were too many movements, not in their proper time; or because he had much pain in his body, so was weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the corsage firm, until the sanies multiply in him; and give him a bath, and give him food and drink; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts the great swelling, and moisten it often with fresh water, until the swelling passes into the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The tortured member after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after recovery, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that one should break the member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and they bring great harm, and perhaps death; but if the nodules and the torture are fresh, then it is fitting that they be moistened with hot water, or with mild herbs that are cooked, such as ox-tail leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make an ointment of the following: take soft muscled vismove, and confit it with ghee or oil of sesame seeds, and make an ointment thereof; or take fat figs, and grind them with hay from a stable, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never is the bone moved by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands. And let there be movement in the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is stiffened and hardened, as in the case of a stone, it needs to be opened with a sharp blade lightly; and put on care and study for the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it now brings back sensitivity,
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le déplace a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if the swelling increases, and by chance it is placed back in its place; for this does not come into being unless one moves it from the hour when it is swollen: many times brings forth spam and other pains; however, once this has happened, if you make the patient well, then leave him, until the abscess has been calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each member as the cure arrives in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the remedies for dislocations of the shoulder joint until it is broken.
des mandibules	the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The following is the translation of the text:
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	"For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die."
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	"When it is whole and complete, then you must take it away from the hospital quickly, without hesitation."
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	The following is the translation of the text:
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he holds the meat even, as long as it comes to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And he brings it back gradually, especially if the two jaws are together, and with hot water and oil, as we have said. Do not delay bringing it back, however, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softening liquid, put it on drapings soaked in oil and wax made from rosewater and wax, then lightly blow on it;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the sick person sleep on their back, and have their heads between two pillows, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor strain themselves, but eat light food, as long as the pains are gone and the jaws are no longer painful.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then, if it is necessary, cut lightly; and do not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well tied and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and they do not return to their places, then fevers and normal heat of the body come, and by chance belly fluid comes up, and by chance pure vomit comes out.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many times the one who has it dies, in seventeen days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the costochondral joint within the rib cage, and it dislocates at the end only and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the sick person lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then he presses the joint with his palm, and it returns; then put the plaster and bandage on him, and binds him; and draws him back.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head that is next to the chest cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates at all, put on the plaster and bandage and hold him back, and order the sick person to rest as long as he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and also we bring back the shoulder of the shield when it is taken away from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	That the shoulder is dislocated only for three reasons: one is that it dislocates at the joint of the socket; and the second is to the part of the jaw; and perhaps it dislocates at the top, and this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck; and many times dislocating out of the socket towards the assembly, but perhaps it dislocates at the top, and this happens little. For those who have little money, because at these he goes to the hospital; and for those who have enough money, let him go, and come back.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps there are those who hit or break, and the shoulder of a hot wound; and thinks that it is dislocated by him.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is known when it turns downward toward the shoulder, and makes a difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will find a clear difference between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find a hole at the head of the shoulder, and take off the shoulder from the neck, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot move his hand back to its place or make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, so that it is not hidden, because you will find it clearly at the neck;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not to be used unless it is new, or when the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister hold the hand of the sick person up, then put your thumb over the joint, and bring the joint to its place with force; and let the minister hold the hand up, and extend it upwards, then let it fall again; so there will be immediate relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said with the hands alone later on, so it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and let a soothing and relaxing infusion be given, such as an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and mielote in water, and be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the sick person lie down on his back, and put a cloth of equal size over the shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then let the minister put his foot on the cloth, and bring the hand of the sick person upwards with force;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and others ministers taint the head of disease, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns now, and you see how to do it according to this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and so that you make present a.k.a. someone who is greater than the patient; and set it right down to their side, and pull up their shoulder off of the patient's body, and raise the body up, so that the patient hangs by their armpit;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers drag the patient's hand downward from their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then pull them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the ramming is also done in another way: and there is a long matchstick on the ground, whose tip is as large as a pistol, and it should not be too thick or too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then treat the patient with fire, but let it only be a little burn, and that the hair remains long; then extend his hand on either side, forming an arch, and the joint returns to its place completely.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take .i. beam of .ij. arms long and .iiij. fingers wide, which has the head resting on it so that the arm can easily move into full dislocation, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place it on the top of the head, so that it does not hurt the patient, and then put it in dislocation; and extend your arms up the long side, and place the shoulder on the beam, and the hand on the top of the arm, and then place the palm of the hand on a stone of a certain size, and let it hang down from the other side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way, then make sure that you put a piece of wool yarn on the shoulder; then set the plastron with powder from the mill, with incense and alumen, all over the shoulder and around it; then remove it from dislocation and tie it to the plastron, and embrace the hand at the collar, and let it remain there.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drink a little, as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal faster; and then he drinks more after .v. days or .vij., and moves it; and if it is firm and it does not become soft, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you treat it with three punctures, as we have said above, using the cauterization before or after applying the ointment.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it does not stand after .vij. days, and the joint cannot hold up the arm or raise it forward, then you know that the nerve in the shoulder is cut, stretched, or weakened; and you know that the joint has never been put back in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is opposite the loins, and the breasts, or behind, is made by an impulse, and stretching of the hands, and I administer another place; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes greasiness to the member, and late moves, so that the patient often bathes, until that greasiness is eliminated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Saves that the joint of the neck is dislocated in two places, and returns to its place; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most of all before and behind, and the dislocation is not properly restored, for we can see and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated neck with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly open. For the joint is bent, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder from all sides.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must bring it back in the same way as the shoulder joint comes out, because if the shoulder joint comes out, then a great deal of grief would result from bringing it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back all at once, but especially when it is behind; so much more than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is this, as soon as it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands from the palm according to the wrist joint, upside down and upside down, and press the joint into its small bones together, or at the root of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then return when it doubles its hand over itself, and firm at the root of the palm the wrist that is upside down.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, then give it strong extension; and it is that each minister extends the arm, and ties it with a double long and wide cloth, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he draws his hand up to the joint, if he does not grease the joint with oil so that it may be smooth, then draw the joint firmly until it moves again.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, if put on dry plaster with ash of wood, and draw it firmly, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then loosen it gradually.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, if loosen the ligature, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with the plaster and the ligature, and leave it in this way for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a layer of sheep's wool, then leave it. A day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bathe.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, then rub the joint gently, then put the new one on top, and then insert or bathe it; and so do .ij. times or .iij. until it is well; and if you see it, then put it on the end of a wet cloth heated with butter, and strain it over; and it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocated hand is loose, and its return is light, more so than with other joints However, it must be brought back to its place immediately after dislocation, even if the joint is swollen or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remounting should be that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend your fingers, and make it even, so that it puts its palm over the joint, and presses it until it comes back to life.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Now therefore, you should look to see if he is in the right place; then put the patient's hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on a table, and you must look at the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then incise the abscesses gently, and let him leave like this without pain.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back after a few days, then the dislocated joint will return to its place.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and will not hold any instrument in his hand as long as his hands are wet, and cannot extract anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other reason for extracting by fire except to remove the case, and perhaps there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in position, put fire on the plaster we have mentioned above, and then remove it and leave it for a while, and then loosen and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, then the hot water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No time are you dislocating the joint of the hand to each side, no time at the back of the palm or at the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then are you putting the joint back in place at your fingertips until it comes back to life, then hold the head of the joint and move it towards the part where it is joined;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and then leave it for .ij. days, and then put it back in line that day; and from not moving it, as we have said, and dislocating it again that day, and making it move, and relinking it; and do this often, until it is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do this if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and do so as you have done before until it is well; and also do this when it is dislocated from the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	How to remove the skin of the foot without hurting it
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the foot or neck is dislocated, or several dislocations occur, without treatment, for fear of death, the patient will soon die.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excreta come out without effort, cannot be held back, and often soften one or more limbs, or both legs or arms, or one of them.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the foot is mute in three parts; that which is mute at the back is called "gilboise".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The dislocation comes from childhood when the child's limbs are not properly formed, and there is no cure or healing for it altogether.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from sitting down or from blows or from similar things, the ancient ways of cure with big words don't help them at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have simplified them according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the childhood that comes before this one, there is no cure or healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also say that what comes straight to the back is what one can cure best, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and so the patient lies down flat on his back with a long and even face, and he is unstrung in such a way that he does not get bruised;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put a 1/4 inch-wide stick in the patient's hair at the back of the head and another one at the bottom of the neck, and tie a ligature across the patient's body from one stick to the other, passing behind the ears and around the waist; then place one foot, then another on top of it, and finally wrap a strap around both feet and fasten it tightly;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the two ministers know the ties, one at the top of the head and the other at the bottom of the neck, among the 1/4 inch-wide sticks;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well shut, the twine so as we have said, and the mirror puts its palms on the spine, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not recover with this cure, take a table of 18 inches long, and shave the side off it, and let the patient lie on one side, and pour the top of the table over the spine, then put the middle of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put the mirror's palms on the other end of the table, and press firmly until he recovers his position; and if you see that it does not work, then do so at the turn of the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And put that there be two fire pokers on the head of the patient with one arm, and put them one next to another, and between each poker, back to back, a palm's width of space;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and let in each beam .i. the pit, where it turns, and let the beams be firmly grounded so that they do not move, and between each two beams let there be one beam turning, because the tie turns, and let in the two turning beams .ij. small beams of a palm's length to turn the tie.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then let the tie that is among the beams at the turner's end toward the top, and the other tie toward the pegs on the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner on all the tie, and the master puts the spike equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, put on dry dung with much ash, and then the stakes, and then the stake of a tablet of 1.ij. cubits long, that by purifying his place from gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie him with a rope as we have said, and use subtle nutrition for him until he is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes to an end in the health of the end, so administer soft and soothing medicines with the stake that we have said before; and do not give him a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and there is never an appearance in the posterior spine of the back, and one thinks that this is dislocation; and this is the bone which opens, so that one must not have any presumption: by chance it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hips
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	come only dislocations, not otherwise; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iii. parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and opens more the diseased knuckles than the healthy ones, and cannot double the diseased kneecap on fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the loins are swollen with heat from the abscess; because the head of the thigh comes from there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that which comes to him at the end, if this accident is opposite to those in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that which comes before him, if his leg is well according to fulfillment; nevertheless, it does not double on its own, and if he has to walk, he cannot go forward, and holds back his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that which comes behind him, if he cannot spread his knee, or double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the head of the thigh is at the place of the sides.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The ramening of this dislocation is that if you treat it when the dislocation is old, and it delays according to its condition, there will be no cure; and it only comes with presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that which the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three ways of dislocation, if you hasten to put back the joint, and it moves inward and outward, and turns to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back in this way, then you must have at hand the minister who is strong, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with one ligature that is tied to the loins;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and with other ministers extend their hand above in such a way that they press their hands together, then tie the ligature over the knee; and one of the ministers ties a knot on the thigh;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains in that position.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is so common to all four appearances, and when the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is quite good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then put the cure to his appearance. When the dislocations are in the parching, if you put the patient on his back, then place the bandage on the root of the buttock, and the line that is separated from the anus, then extend the bandage upward toward the anus, and upward toward the forceps;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then have others ministers hold his arms, and embrace the large line of the buttock that is ill, and extend it in the form of an S: now he will return to his position; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this way that we have said, then you should tie the .ij. feet of the sick together with a strong thread under the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. knees, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang him by the head on a pole, and let him be 5 feet above the ground; then command 1 minister to embrace the thigh of the sick, and let others hang with the sick, who embrace the thigh firmly, for the joint will now come back soon enough.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is away, let the sick person lie as we have said in that which has gibeligheid, and stretch out a thread properly on the sick leg, and on the foot also;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put 2 torches, 1 at the head and 1 at the feet, then set a torch between the legs of the sick person in mi-forme;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and set up wet drapes around, so that he does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let him put the dislocation in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on . the table, and press him in such a way as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder, and place the patient on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, extend the injured leg carefully, and according to what I have said; and let him put his pain on the sound leg, then press with the other hand, and bend towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the side, do not extend the injured leg backwards, nor lift it up from the ground, but rather let it fall backwards as it was when lying down, as we have said in the couch of the two hips; and:
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it rest on its face, and let the limb be extended as we have said above, and must all be pressed upon the joint to the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then remove the splint, apply the plaster, and extract a piece of wood so that the shin does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for three days or four, then remove it and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are even, extract it as before, and let it be. three days; then remove it and make it walk loudly until the limbs are comfortable again.
de la dislocation dou genoil	from the dislocation of the hip joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The dislocations come about in three ways: within, behind, and before. They do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are these: instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not touch his knee, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your legs;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee with your palms, and draw them together, then bend the two knees with your thigh; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux returns to its place, and the signs are that he touches his knee gently with his leg;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and cover it with the plaster, and make sure the leg is well supported in the socket, and keep it together firmly.iij. jors ou iiij., then release it; and do not work the patient to walk, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not in place, then administer stretching firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is never dislocated, nor fully displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are such that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	they shall bring him if he is light, and they shall stretch him lightly to his hands when he is very much in pain.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from above, so that you make the patient lie down on his back and tie him up by his legs, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	and then turn the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left, twice, and then stretch it upward, and blow on the foot upward;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this 19 times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, then begin again the work, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a stake firmly into the ground between his knees, and tie the sheets around him so that he does not hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then tie the minister's knee, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with .i. a strap, so that he lies on the edge of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and place the stake firmly between the patient's knees to keep the patient still while you work;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the mirror evenly with your hand, and other ministers will dip the healthy leg in the dye, and the dislocation will return completely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is dry, put the plaster on and let it dry, and the splint form, and fasten the foot to the leg, and guard the tendons behind the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for .ij. days or .iij., and let the splint form; then remove it on the third day and take care not to walk; then after four days, go out and walk slowly;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it is well extended without work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the small of the back or in the foot, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a flat surface or on a table right up, and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot form, until it comes back;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is nothing opened, then set the foot down on a table at 1.5 feet, and stretch it out, and leave it for .3 days, then remove it; and let it rest, until it is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be overbearing:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing paste, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see any hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if I restore now the limb to its place, so that the sore comes;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, if you apply soothing paste to the wound, and treat it with dry ointment, as it should be done;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the small bones are displaced, then make what we have said about simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and you shall not enter the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you much, according to your Creator, and for the sake of the preservation of your arm and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here is the translation:
