O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have finished it with its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete this treatise for you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work by hand is treated in our region and is strange from all over, it is a worthy science and appropriate, and it is not delayed from the fire more than the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me seems that I shall add to it the order of this healer in accordance with the path of exposure and statement and abbreviation; and will come together with the shapes of the tools for cauterization, and other instruments for the work, with the adjustment of the statement and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with it to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the shapes and connections and separations of the vessels, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and rest of the joints, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason it is said that nothing is with the good, and without the bad, and with work there is danger; and most of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not familiar with the above mentioned things, let him beware that he does not err and harm others; so that I have often wanted many of those who meddle in this science and who abandon themselves to theory and not to experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another foolish man who caught a stone from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took it out with him and killed himself in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen him called to pull out a stone from the bladder of a woman, and I saw the appearance of the disease and the size of the stone; and if he had pulled it out, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another mirth who took in cure a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound. And the mirror plain of ignorance draws out the break on the wound with very strong medicine, leaving no scar to the wound, and leaves it thus.i. finished; and he commanded that he did not unfasten it at all; and delayed so that his leg was completely gone and the toes came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of corruption were confirmed in him or his member, and he could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to go away by the member until the members were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirth who broke apart.i. abscess that was infected, and then set it on fire with the evil of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholic humor, it must only be touched with iron if it is not in its natural place so that all that is corrupted can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, good son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into 1.2 divisions: that is to say, work in which there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason, you must guard yourself so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your arms in confidence, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galleons gives some of his admonitions: "Do not take on as your own work the healing of a sick person unless you are called to do so."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to II. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are on fire cautery and water-based medicine, and the order of the limbs; and the forms of instruments, and the iron instruments for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are on cutting and piercing, and sucking out wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and the order of the chapters and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; and it prescribes the use of a pole for support up to the hip, and the shape of tools.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, we remember the work; it is necessary that I explain the quality of help and the harm of each complexio
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and its reply hidden; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree with it; and I am lacking in words, for I shorten them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is helpful to all complexions when it has matter; otherwise, it is not. That is to say, a complexio
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In warm and dry complexions together the matter, no one devised and said that cautery is great help; and another said the opposite: that cautery does not deserve to be used for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used by hot disease caused by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases that come in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man with his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And any path, does not interfere but that who has experienced it, and who knows by long practice the use of the cautery paste, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the remedies and the space of time; we do not fear others' complexions, nonetheless with cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all that should be gathered and agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that combined fire cautery is more effective than hot medicine in treating secrets and many other illnesses.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not forth except to the limb which it burns, and harms no other member so much.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by removal, and bring disease of harm to the member for cure; and perhaps they cause illness.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not cause heat, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experiment and because of the length of my service and of the study that I have employed in this art, and it is based on the veracity of things; and therefore I ask forgiveness for the length of speech, since I do not like to deprive you of the secret which is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating; take it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at a certain time, and they should be performed while praying.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harmful effects that may arise due to the help of cauterization; and most especially, the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until the time when greater harm may come upon the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And I do not think at all, son, as they do so foolishly; for when a disease is cured by cauterization, there is no return to the former state; and that is how it should be done; but it is not like what they think; for cauterization is only medicine that changes the appearance, drying up the humors which cause pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of speed of action, and due to its excellence and dignity.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And one may choose that the disease never returns according to the appearance of the illness and its place and virtue; and superfluities are gathered in it by the acquisition of meat and similar things; unless cauterization is administered at the right time when there is little surplus and moisture, as is done for pain, and for similar things, and the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not hear for the reason that the remedies are called the derrières of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that the remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and these are the derrières of medicine because when we administer ways to cure in no disease and they are not worth it, then let us administer the remedy, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Now, although remedies are the derrières of medicine, do not hear them according to the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients used to say that a gold-based remedy is more effective than one made of iron, and they only spoke about the quality of gold and its high value; they said that the edges of remedies do not cause inflammation, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that in certain people they do; and a gold remedy is more effective than an iron one, as they used to say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And wherever you heat gold-based instruments, you will not be able to tell if they are too hot or not just by their color, and they can quickly cool down; and if you heat them too much, they will burn on the fire; and so there is enough hesitation.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter up to the part about the eye, so that it is easier for you to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is useful for the head, especially for the brain, and for the ears. It also helps with many ailments, including those caused by cold, such as paralysis, sodom, and apoplexy; and it can also help with pain in the dens and throat, and with many other diseases caused by cold.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solitive medicine which purifies the head.iii. times or iiij., according to what the virtue and the eagerness and the acostumance of the patient can bear; and then do again the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then put the cross between your hands, and place your palms on the roots of his neck; after that put his two roots, if it bleeds, then heat the fire which is called "olivaire", from which comes this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then put the cross between your hands, and place your palms on the roots of his neck; after that put his two roots, if it bleeds, then heat the fire which is called "olivaire", from which comes this form:
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And then put the cross between your hands, and place your palms on the roots of his neck; after that put his two roots, if it bleeds, then heat the fire which is called  "olivaire", from which comes this form:
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should let the cautery burn so much of the bone that it is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one must let the cautery burn so much of the bone, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be cured; and that one must open the wound very wide, as women put in their needles to cause the humors to come out; and it must be kept open for a long time; after it must be cured and dressed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases; for in some men where there is a tendency to pain; and I believe that I should let it burn; for the head bone is weakened by continuous solutions due to nature, as we witness with other limbs; and even when the head bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing seems more safe and milder to me, and so I use it in the assembly in all cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head comes chronic pain and lasts a long time, then you must use the yeris of the patient and pills which are called "cochie", and head purgation and oils and poultices; and if one does the fire cautery which we have just said, and it is not good.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him slightly as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the fire cautery on each horn of the head, as we have said above, and making the "vasselz" cautery where one puts the leeches; and it is good that you hold your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: The patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is good that the cornes cauterizes be more subtle than those of which one makes the cautery of the head's moieneteit, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the neck comes sudden pain, and is spread to the oil, and the head is purged with medicines mondifian, and other cures have been done that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not benefit: then make cauterizes according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicine water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When the medicine water cautery does not work, take a piece of almond wood, and cut off the bark and the top, and then make two holes in it, and then put on cotton plunged in oil until it dries out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the medicine ointment has been applied until it is well, and if you see that some of the medicine burners that I have written or treated with medicines burners do not work.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery if it is according to this way: Heat the cauterizer in which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparence; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And called "close" because the chief is made in the form of a clo or there is .i. poc corbeure, and in the middle with a small appearance; and put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly a little, until half of the keur's flesh is burned; and release your hand that the artery does not burn, which is old, and runs an abundance of blood.
de emigraine	de emigraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure the emigraine as we have said in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery before spoken of is taken from the medicine and of the iron does not sufice to it; then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign as soon as a half-inch line is drawn on the painful spot, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come to the mandible when it is swallowed, and that the muscle does not move when it is moved, and you guard against the pain of the blood that comes from the artery when it is covered, or coming with great fear to those who do not know it, and who are students and experienced; and leave the work in half a line; but I will tell you how to stop the pain when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it affects in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cautery does not suffice to the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize him in his head also as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the extract of the artery, with a cautery that has .ij. tools; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ears occurs due to cold, and one has applied the soluable medicines and other cures we mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not subside, then apply this fire cautery, which is called "poins", whose form is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying fire to the entire ear that is painful, including the .ij. points where the pain persists in both ears, and then moving away from the ear's root a little towards its tip; make .x. points on each ear; then cure the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	torture which must be cured by fire is only good for those that move because of fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use fire on similar things that come from sweat and dander of dogs.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similarity of torture that moves because of fluid from the head and gargling, and this is not good, so it is worth that you burn the disease with .iij. cauterizes: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further away in the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and place the fire on the part that is healthy, and make the fire on the head of the ear from a little point at the tip of the head, and another also far away; and leave the fire burning until half of the burn is done; and this is the form of the fire:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the form of the scalpel that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is worth that the blade is a little thicker; after curating the place as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	Here is the translation of the text:
de litargie	"of argilla"
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	"For this disease, give the patient large pills and medicinal oil to the brain; then place the paste on his head, using sage oil, which is written or used to make plasters; and this is the way of the cautery: if you do so as I have said."
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	"If he is well thus, it is good; and if not, make 13 cauterizations of the oil on his head going down to his collar, and space between each cauterization of .iij. two; and treat as before, and if he farts or makes noise, and the patient suffers, make 1 cauterization in the middle; and the art is, 2 others on the two horns, and treat as long as he is well; and let the cauterizations which are called 'olive', be made as I have said before."
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	of the cold to be cleansed from years and from what we have said before; after rinsing the head of the patient, then you do fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then you do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and he leaves them until the two corners are burnt, and you raise your hand; after curing until it is healthy, and the cautery which is called "olive" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy It is important for those who are experiencing seizures to first cleanse the brain from years of illness and from other cures that we have mentioned in the chapter when the patient is suffering greatly and severely from medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate the fire, they make him gargle and chew bone meat often; after that, they put his head between their knees, and do as I have said above, and also do cauterization on his neck and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, they do cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the neck, on the spine of the back and on the neck, and make the cauterization olive according to the way that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, they do a subtle cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moisture and thick fluid, then the fire cauterization that we have said to one who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy there is a decline in melancholy and the patient's neck is moist, then he drinks something that clears his mind, according to what it is above in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having washed the head of the sick person; then make 1 . i . a tortoiseshell made of fine linen, also like a circle, and place it on the head; and the sick person should lie with his face down, and be held fast from all sides; then present the ointment, and moisten it with old butter; and the fire must be gently heated so that the sick person can bear it; then empty the shell through the opening in the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good government, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you wish to cauterize him by making many punctures all over the body. This way of cauterizing moistens the skull evenly; and then cotton soaked in butter and oil is put on.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the first signs come as I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the sick person purifying thing the head, and guarding from all moisture, and let him sweat or bathe many times while he is fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he orders to touch his head again, and has it cauterized, and has .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples where it is separated from the ear in one place, and in another where it is separated in one ear; and covers all the cautery with all the veins and arteries that are spread out, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and take care that there is no blood going out, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, then stop him from bleeding by putting on as much as he can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to cauterize the arteries and incise in order to stop the bleeding; and never do you make a cautery or an incision on the 2 bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	the two courses of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deplete the arteries that are in appearance like the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and damp superfluities, therefore he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the ear descending to the eyes: 1. cauterize the head, and 2. cauterizes on the 2 temples, and 3. cauterizes where he haters the bones; and if it is necessary more, if the cauterize well on the sill above all small cauterize.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	how to make a wound dry quickly
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	2. times the wine; after he takes the chief, and makes cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and makes
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	2. times the wine; after he takes the chief, and makes cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and makes
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see this, make .iij. cauterizes on the .iij. sores so long as the hairs are; and do not let the hand go forth unless until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has come when the hair of the oil is converted to the parched land, and strikes the oil, and it is done on cauterizes according to 2 ways: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and even, then put the patient on your chest; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the feather of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign of the delicate hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and muskillaige of persillion on oil, then heat the cautery where there is this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the burn is in the right place; and the sign of the work of health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then lift your hand, and leave it there for .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as the burn is hot; after the cure of ointment until it is well.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is soft then start again the cautery on the same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and even, and does not touch the hair of the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal hot cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the feather of mirth; then take French soap and live heat, each one 2z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that if it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the feather of mirth, and put it on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease holds in 1 oil only, so must he operate in 1 also, and if in both; and put cotton wet in wax
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, if your pain persists, then take the medicine with your food.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the medicine has worked, then raise your arm, and if you see the pulse rise again as though it had been raised by fire or incision; and if so, it is well. If not, then put more of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your hair is long and even; then put cotton in the wound with a little oil until the burn has healed, after which cure the wounded place which is called "diane," and other places, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you have hair on your arm that needs to be treated with great care so that the medicine does not cause it to fall out. And if the cotton becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then begin again with the medicine on the same place where the cotton has become soft; do this as before; then cure until it is well; and that is the form of the ointment of myrrh:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's hair is different in length and thickness, and according to what suits you; and do not attempt to apply the same treatment to all, for each person has his own unique needs in this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and dip cotton wicks in oil of rose or juice of pepperwort over oil; then heat the cauterizer; and hold it to the scalp as if in the shape of a feather, together with the tip being the cauterizer; if you see, so point out from one scalp to the other, and if you do not see, so as a tent; but nevertheless, it is necessary that it be held on the scalp.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work on it, and then apply fire to the part with oil; put the cauterizer in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be good. If not, begin cauterizing again, and if you need more, leave it .iij. days; after i put cotton moistened in oil on the wound, and treat with drying ointment until it is healthy, and if .xl. days pass without being healthy, then put on medicine that corrodes until the bone is exposed; and make a cure according to what has come out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	I have a way of cauterizing the fistula that no one of the ancients has spoken of. Know what a fistula is, and open the place; then put in the opening 1/4 pound of very thin caugh, so that it is this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and i make the quantity of an 1/4 pound; and hold your hand firmly where the caugh is, so that it does not move at all, so that the melted caugh does not run into its oil; and you must put cotton moistened in oil on the wound, at the fistula's opening, and it will be cured by a wonderful cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, you must pierce the nose, and bring back the fistula to the nose's own place.
des crevaices en levres	of the fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	the mouth of times have coming fissures in the lips which are called "hair", and most commonly in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not profit, then heat .i. a small fire-cauterizer according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it directly in those fissures until it comes out clean; after the cure, apply the cauterizer again until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes up to the root of the throat or palate or roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swelled and become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, but it does no good: then it is necessary that you have 1.i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes up to the base of it, and do so once or twice, after the cure as we have said, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the base and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the disease in your mouth; after heat the cautery so that its shape will come out as you put a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after release your hand and restart the cautery according to your desire; after fill the mouth with salty water, and let it sit for an hour and rinse it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, those who were moving are made to stand still, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and腐敗した。
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or it is cold in the mouth, and medicines have no effect, then it is necessary to use one of two methods of treatment: fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip into a wooden or bronze spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and moisten it with butter, and place it on the toothache carefully until it cools down; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if the wool and cotton become moist with the butter, and place it on the toothache, and place the bronze or iron tip hot as much as the fire comes to the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery together if it is such that you squeeze a ring of iron or of rain, and be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick; after heat the cauterizer, for from this it will take shape then, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand as long as the cautery is cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be increased that day or the next. And it comes that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cauterizer, and then he rages fire; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterizer of the root that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the ring:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold and moist heat, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the head cauterizer so that here after comes the form, and has ij. openings for the fumes to come out at the head of the cauterizer; and put the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or ij. it is necessary, until it comes to the source of the abscess; and let it sit there with cotton wet in butter until the burning is done; then cure the affected area with onions and tents until it is well.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture conquers on the cheeks and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be cleansed with soluble medicines; after that, make cauterization at the root of the throat, and keep yourself from going any further down the throat, but only a little. After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterizations, which are called "clavicles", give us the shape before; and heal the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	from the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an ancient disease, then you must make ij cauterizations on the forelegs in their eyes; and another cauterization spill milk between two breasts; and let the cauterizations, which are called "clavicles", according to the shape that is before stated.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make cauterization in piercing all the cauterizations which are called "poins" from which the form is here before in the disease of the ears; and let the piercings go up to .iii., or so enter. After that, heal the place according to what is before said, and let the cauterizations be at .iii. rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you make it with two hands.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, treat the pain on his back and sides; then place your right hand over the spot where the hot iron is placed; and if the joint has dislocated, heat the iron for the second time. Here is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize with fire as long as it pierces up to the cost, and the figure of the cautery together comes; iiij. cauteres; and for this one is made cauterization with the cautery which has .iij. ners, so that the figure of cauterization are .sis cauteres; and they are the nerves according to the subtility of a tent and it is the form of cautery who has .iij.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is set on this 1 nerve so that there are 6 cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then put on the fire cautery; grind with it the salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated from above, let there be a hole; then make a cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or many cauterizes in piercing. For the jointure is closed, and the moisture is osseous and heals the patient.
dou cautere de pleuresin	dou cautere de pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	dou cautere de pleuresin
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Et no ancient ones said that any man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and scuffs it and puts it between the ribs, until he reaches the lung; and he gasps for breath, as we have said in the chapter on the lung. But in this work there is doubt and fear, and many die, or a fistula comes which can never be healed.
de la mice	de la mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways to perform cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these three ways, one is so that you do 3.3 cauterizations, or iiij., according to the length of the mouse's body, according to the shape of the fire cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization at once, and leave the patient sore on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has 2 ners, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and bring the cautery which is on the side of the mouse, where the cut comes from left to right, and raise the cautery according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, heat the 2 ners of the cautery until the cut is visible from the other side, and then quickly bring the cautery; and thus you will have done 3. And if you see, then cauterize all of the cauterization at once with 3 ners. After the cure, when it has been heated for a long time, and this is enough to heal the other cure that we have said before.
de ydropisie	from drop
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	from dropsy
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization is finished, leave it uncovered for a long time to prevent any return of the fever, and do not continue the cure after the cauterization; and the healing would speed up, and both the 2 intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key we have before us; and that for the back is olive-colored, according to what it is described here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen in a person with gout and they turn yellow, you should burn on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and hold your hand away from the fire without turning it too much. And don't enter too much deeply, lest the fire turn yellow, and do the burning according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on.ij. legs  .ij. cauterizes on each leg at the point of the cuticle; and let the cauterize burn long on the leg, one before the knee and the other behind, as you walk; and leave the cauterizes in place for a long time without washing, that the fire go out; after doing so to the other cures we have said.
de la menoison	of the palace
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest are present in the stomach and in the intestines, it cannot be cured by any manner of cure; and you will see the patient very sick and of great virtue, so do this. i. 3. cauterize the stomach according to what he has spoken about here before or cauterize the stomach, circled; and 2. 3. cauterize inside the buttocks gently up to all i. cauterize nailed, and 1. cauterize on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cauterization on the knuckle, and 1. cauterize each toe, and 2. small cauterizes on the stomach of delight, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	from the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are cold and moist corrupt humors, and they are cured if we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, so cauterize: 1.3 on the spine of the back, that which is all through the buttocks little by little and in triancing, and 1. cauterize the butts. 2. two;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cooled down and the meat is not cooked, and one can see the face swell, then let there be a great cauterization over the stomach, as it has been said above, and another over the liver, and another over the heart with all the cautery nailed; and let the cautery remain uncovered for a long time. After treating the wound until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the necrosis which is called "thelus"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope to the necrotic tissue, if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire over that necrotic tissue; and leave it so that your hand can hold the cautery until the vein is born, from which it is cut; do this once or twice, and if there is any more necrosis, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery over the necrotic tissue, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate a wound or incision, we will tell you in detail how to treat it so that it can be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is a fistula, and it becomes inflamed and oozes pus and moisture, if you apply a subtle test all around, and be sure that you know exactly how much it extends: Then heat the cautery which seems sharp, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the test has entered, and start the cautery again as long as the pus and corrupt matter are burned, once or twice, according to the quantity of the test; and be careful about the nerves which are in there, and do not cut those large veins. If the fistula goes into the liver or intestine, be careful about these places, and do not cut them except in the charnted place, and think that it is not persistent; afterwards, cure that place as long as it is healthy, and if the matter is dried up, and the bones are exposed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, know that the place is half-healed, and the bone at the bottom is corrupt. And in this way we will tell you about each of these.
de la maladie des reins	from kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes with a loud noise and strong windiness, and does not respond to female treatment, then you should perform cauterization on the kidneys from one side to the other using the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned above; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 3 cauterizations in a line, and they will be even more helpful.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	when the bladder is weak and weak with cold and moisture so that the patient holds urine, then do a fire cautery on the outside of the bladder, where the hairs of the penis prick, and so on both sides, and each cauterize as long as one finger; and do a cautery behind the back, or as many as you need; and let the cauterizes be clawed according to the shape above mentioned.
de la marris	of the scrotum
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	when the scrotum is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms are late; and when they come, such great pain do they cause: therefore it is necessary that one do 11 cauterizes around the testicles, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and 9 cauterizes behind the back; and let the cauterizes be clawed, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be wet at the end of the department where they are, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip box at .i. a circle-shaped cautery, and mark in front of the joint around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if it is such cauteries as those we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present with you, make .iij. cauteries from the large olive, and let the cauterization be perfect like all the others; and heal it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with large humors of pills made from rotten substances, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery, and the method of the cautery is as follows: that is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. cauterizations triangular according to this form, and make them deep and broad, and leave between each cauterization a space the size of two, and let them be olive; never do you make a cauterization in the middle on top of the head of the hip, because there are .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, if the cauterization by the circle that we have just mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it with this way that the circle includes all the hip, and all the depth of the cure is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way that they do in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach further up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes only as far as the thigh and leg, then you make .ij. cauterizations there where the patient says the pain is, and .i. cauterization on top of the ankle  iiij times, at the edge, and let the cure be burnt; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to his two toes or to the foot, then cauterize it at that place with fire.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	Et si tu veux être un bon guérisseur, tu dois faire cela; et s'il fait mal à la hanche vers la cuisse, fais-lui un cautère avec une lame de rasoir ou circulaire, et veille bien sur tous tes instruments pour que tu n'en perdes aucun, ni ne brûles les nerfs et les grosses artères, et ne causes pas au malade beaucoup de tort et de contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who made a cautery on the foot of the leg, and let it go so that the entire leg was drawn in, and also the bones, and was pierced and corrupted all the bones; after which a remedy for the belly brought him death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	Et si le mal est dans les deux jambes, fais un cautère dans l'une et dans l'autre, selon cette méthode. // Et les sages ont dit en la cautère de la cheville, de laquelle ci est la manière, fais un fer ainsi gros comme un ongle de doigt, ou un peu moins, et soit entre les deux chevilles et soit d'un côté entre les chevilles et soit de l'autre côté d'une certaine quantité comme une tête de poce; et soient les entrechetres à l'envers des deux parties, et soient aussi comme des noix, et en ait il 1/2 poce de fer bien fait; et voici la forme:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si le mal n'est que dans un membre, fais un cautère d'une manière telle que ci est dit. Et si le mal n'est que dans un membre, fais un cautère d'une manière telle que ci est dit:
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasius says that we should use little of this fire cautery because of the danger of the burning, and few people use it; but indeed this is a good cautery, which can be borne, and where it adheres.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of both sides
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either through bending or impact or through excessive evacuation, or through the appearance of expanded cold material, no remedy is appropriate unless it is due to an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate to treat pain in the back with a remedy that causes nausea and vomiting; this can be done by applying a cold compress to the back where the pain is located, three lines apart from each other. In each line, apply a cauterization according to the strength and quantity of the remedy that the patient can tolerate; and if necessary, apply an additional cauterization using the "knob" cauterization technique. If you are unsure, apply two or three cauterizations according to the strength and quantity of the remedy that the patient can bear; and always use the cauterization knife technique:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Maitre surgeon, I command you to instruct the patient to maintain a tight bandage when he rises, and fear will come upon him; and you shall find in the back of his neck at the base of the spine and in the appearance that comes on top of other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you treat him, if he is burned, cauterize him with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire cautery is applied evenly to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with a burning cautery, a line or two, or three, and let them be close together. After treating, until he is well according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in gibbosity which is in the marrow of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints comes from moisture that spreads to each limb of the trunk, and when the pain appears in pieces, which they properly call 'podagre', and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by fire cautery in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the olive cautery follow this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When it is necessary to apply the fire cautery to the sole of the foot, then apply the whole fire cautery to all the joints claimed 'point'. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then apply the fire cautery to each knee .iiij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, in all the olive cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand firm except for as long as the skin of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, then administer the cautery we have spoken about in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then apply fire to the base of the fingers 1.ij. lines; and if there is still pain in the two joints or hair on the hand, then apply fire to each joint and to the hair on the hand; and if the pains come up to the shoulders or elbows, then cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and give medicines. For if you do this well and flush out the fluid, then he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinew
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the wound appears in the arm, and the ball-joint falls down on the ground and is just recently, so that when you look at it to heal, he does not get worse that day; and use things that leave your belly open, so that the end descends from your belly; after this, let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to wet his shirt as long as the balls are being mended, and take them in your two hands, and sign with one hand from above the wound on the bone with a knuckle, and make all signs that are like half of a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery for this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is white and has fallen down. Then take the balls to their place; and the minister wet his hand so that he does not turn back; and well work the legs of the sick man, and put him on his .i. cussin and .i. serjant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which Wet his hands; then put the cautery on your sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so you begin again another time until you come to the bone; and beware that the ball does not move when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the sick man does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and that of the great ones also according to their measure; after 3 days heal him with oil as long as he is scorched, after which heal him with other medicines as long as he is healthy, and let the sick man lie 40 days on his back as long as the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his nurses be rested for a long time, so that the ball does not move when he goes to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made girdle, and keep it on for .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too much shouting; and when he has done this teaching, let him be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	For the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When there are ruptures in other bellies and they are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make 1/3 of the fire for the cauterization according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third corner according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign is the beginning of the line and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another below it, and with your thumb press down on all the cauterization. But the first cauters are lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine for it is not effective, then it should be burned with fire that is called 'poins', and the burn should be made according to the length of the limb, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its location from torments, and its pain. If it heals after one burn, that's good; but if not, then make another burn on top of that one, for such is custom, so that you should make the burns as long as the patient remains ill.
de meselerie	of healing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Here comes the translated text:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	Et s'il est dilapider partout, il perd manifestement; si donc tu le cautérises de ces cautères que nous avons dit au chef, et c'est-à-dire un cautère dans son nez, et deux cautères sur la lèvre du cou, et sept cautères sur la colonne vertébrale, et un grand sur la nuque, et une autre délicatesse, et deux sur les épaules, et deux sur les côtes, et deux sur chaque main, et sur les creux des mains; et garde-toi de bruler les nerfs qui sont sous le poignet, de peur qu'ils ne brûlent; et ne fais jamais de cautère sur l'os du poignet, ou sur l'os de la poitrine, ou sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And if it is scattered everywhere, it will lose manifestly; so if you cauterize it with those cauteries which we have said to the head, and that is to say, one cautery in his nose, and two cauteries on the lips of the neck, and seven cauteries on the spine, and a great one on the back, and another delicacy, and two on the shoulders, and two on the ribs, and two on each hand, and on the creases of the hands; and keep yourself from burning the nerves that are under the wrist, lest they burn; and do not ever make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or on the bone of the chest, or on the liver. Know that when you make more cauteries, you will do more help, and it will profit you; and know that the patient does not feel the pain of the cautery as much as the healthy one feels it, because his body is already very corrupt. And it should be that the cautery is large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you shall find in a way with iron. After that, cure him with flour of times with honey and other cures until he is well.
de enfleure	de enfleurer
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When the swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, it is not yet healthy, then the fire cautery must be performed on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cautery be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then let it be oiled until it is healthy. And never is cautery done, with hand or foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the member, so is the swelling osseous; and yet there enters nothing if he knows not the members and exits of nerves moving the body.
de albaras	de albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is aggravated, and the medicine does not help, then a fire cautery must be performed with a precise cauterizer, according to the amount of flesh around the affected area, until the blight is exposed, and its color changes; then cure it with flour, oil, and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almond juice, each in equal parts; mix them together, wrap them in a cloth, and apply heat until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	For the cure of the plague by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the ulcer appears at the beginning, and you stop up the sight, if the fire cautery is done on the circumference of the ulcer. And all the wise men will tell you that a cauterization should also be made in the middle of the ulcer; but to me this does not seem good, because I fear that it may become inflamed and corrupted, and I have never wanted to do so; and a more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, at the circumference, as we said for many fire cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For some people have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, or because of the excess fluid it produces, or because of the age of the patient when it is very old, and it has little blood, or because of the heat of the disease; and you see him hurry to die: then cauterize him all around with small fire cauterizations while poking; then let it be like that. Because it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce it all the way with the fire cauterization, make the fire cauterization very hot so that this is its shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And hold your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has completely healed, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels a distance from it in some way so that the course of the pus is chosen. After the cure, as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a mixture of members, because it eats the members as fire dries them up. If you see this disease in its beginning, which can be treated with fire cauterization, then heat the cauterizations small and large, according to what suits the place where the disease is; after the fire cauterization on all sides until you have healed all corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that all corruption is not taken away. And then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption. After the cure with medicines that generate heat, in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said about the cure with medicines that generate heat in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	the porcellains that come from the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mouth times has come that the pies by default do not give a disease which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a gross faulted thing that bleeds the foot. And the treatments of this disease are according to 2 ways. It is known cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is so that you heat up 1 cauldron as well like what is a pen of vault, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can push the nail from all sides, and there are subtle margins; after it put everything hot on the nail, and return your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it in this way 1 day as long as it begins to go corruption; then he does a plaster of wild thistle crushed with string, and leaves the plaster on all night, and the nails will chomp and be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the sore by charging as much as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if it is converted by default the body, and many times has come and in hands and em pies, then you must put cautery of hot water; and it is a third way: take a stick of copper or iron, or a pen of vault, and put on the nail and the athenol, that is to say porrells warts; and put the stick on so that it turns red all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the stick comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water route deep until the root; and allow the disease a little the sting of the hot water an hour; then leave it, and it will be uprooted all its roots. So do one after another, as long as you have cured all these that are in the body, then cure the sores that cause char.
li cure dou trembler	And cure the trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	Here is the translation of the text:
des pustules puans	for the pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	For when the body is covered with pustules that appear from large corrupted matter. If it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a delicate cautery made from fern, whose tip is held in fire, or from the root of a plant called aristeola, or with a lens-shaped cautery. And never make the cauterisation at the beginning when they appear, according to this method; and it cannot grow any more pus, but is healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	For when an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Maitres avient grant decorremens de sang de l'artere qui est coupe a la plaie que vient au parchemin, ou a l'incision de l'apotheme, ou au cautere du membre, et a les semblanches choses; et est mout grief chose d'estenchir.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Many times there is a great discharge of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the parchment, or to the incision of the abscess, or to the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop. And yet when any one of them happens, if you hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it a little so that the blood does not gush out any more; then put fire to the olive cauterys, great and small, as long as they are all red; then take 2 ounces, or more or less according to the wound and its place, considering that the artery is blocked, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place until the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if he catches fire when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished; then take quickly another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop making one after another as long as the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be stopped well unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who shall administer such a tight bandage of cloth or burning things upon it, or other similar things, unless he takes advantage of this?
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirred nor presented medicine, then he must put his two fingers upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and the vein; and do not move them but moisten them with cold water repeatedly until the blood is frozen and thickened and stretched; and make incisions in advance where cauterization and medicine are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the forms of cauterization are appropriate; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning, and I will go on from there in this chapter by the same route as before for those who wish to test it more lightly than those who seek a cure.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that with this ointment there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to take any foolishness into account. For in many cases people come for treatment. If they come from those who, because of their illness, have died easily due to the violence with which they have endured their illness and the greatness of their ill fortune; and from these one must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give you their advice and say: "Wait, I am dying"; and the illness is treacherous. It is not appropriate that you consent to such people who come to you who have this way; but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open your doors foolishly but carefully, for those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have gained something, and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be converted. And such a one will aid you in acquiring good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three holy sons, our lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you would like to breathe life into the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to the one before and after the chapter of the cauterizes, which I have devised from the beginning up to the middle, so that you may find more easily that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often comes to children in infancy, and when the baby cries too much, it pulls the head of the child; and there is never a response to this reason that one does not understand.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; therefore it seems to me that I should slow down the work of this chapter a little in the cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulders were wet with water, and each day the head became heavier so that it could not be supported; and because of the moisture, he died, and this moisture came together between the shoulder blade and the rib cage, between the breastbone and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture comes together between the breastbone and the bone, and the ribs are small, then you should cut a wide hole in the head with the edge of the chisel; and be so far away as 12 inches, until the moisture runs; and see this form of the chisel:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross with this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is behind the bone, and the signs that you see are that the joints of the head are opened from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand on the inside, and it does not respond to you: then you should cut three cuts in the shape:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. After drawing out the bandages and powders, put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then take it off, treating the wound with tar and ointments, and let the head be drawn out equally, and feed the patient dried meat of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you look at the opening of the anus, and the gathering of the urine; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So then cut at the opening of the anus, and the discharge of urine, and deal with it according to what you can do; and guard against covering the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient dies from a burst vessel and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "cataract" in the eye or the kidney, and the disease is old age, and the medicine does not benefit, then the following remedy is: cauterize with what you cover the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you have covered the eyes, let the patient rub his forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries show, then extract the patient's neck from all of it; then look where the pulse beats, and the two sides are after the ears, and they are both reopened; then sign the sides, then cover each with a sponge wet with 2 parts. until the cut comes up to the bone, and that is done by the large side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, squeeze out the sponge from the artery and cover it on top; also cut it like 2 parts with a saw.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the pulse is covered, then let it go up continuously without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Et s'il le poignent à lor naissance, se li estraint les euls qu'il ne se muvent tant qu'il naissent.
de emigrainne	De migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old migraine comes, and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old sore foreheads and similar things, and is medicine by the methods of medicine cure and all this does him no good, let we draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, if com we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes a second hair on his temples, and hears to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not too tight except for some men who are too cold; and if it is re-tightened, then extract its neck from some sheets, then rub the place with no sharp cloth, and raise the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulate where this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	And then peel the skin lightly until you come to the artery, and twist it up like pinches, and remove it well from the cloths that are soiled by each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the hook, and cover it with that part according to the quantity of .ij. chapters. For if it is not covered, then neither will the blood go through all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And twist the blood of 30 chapters until 15; and if the artery is large, then you must bind it with 15 loops of a strong double silk thread, which will not be broken in front of the splashing of the wound, and will flow away from blood; then cut off the excess that is between the 15 loops at that same time, and then, if you see fit, so cauterize it with the cautery cutlass until the bone is reached while the hair is still cut; and this is the operation of the hot wound, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is a great help for ending moisture; because this is even greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For when extracting arteries, you should fill the artery's place with fine cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you take them off, treat with dry medicines that cause a char to be born, and with tents, until they are healthy; and if there is no cupping by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and extract it by hand so that the blood is extracted; and if you do not have this present, put your thumb on the place as long as the blood is frozen, and raise the place of cold water as long as the blood stops flowing, and extract it in the way that should be; and the one that is moistened and lighter during the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-trimming on both sides, but let the trimming be well spaced to last longer with heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, its heat lasts less.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two tools a space of an inch, and then when you have tied up the two ends, and you measure with the sharp edge on both sides until it comes to the bone, and cope the vein in the two ends; and they are separated by the two nails because it is not stiffened by this cautery everywhere; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come out of veins that are on the forehead at the top of the skull, and there is no benefit from medicine that is done, and you see the face of the patient turn gray, and feel a cold movement like shivers; and if oil is held and wet so that the hairs of the eyebrows fall, and the eyebrows burn, and are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to do this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And it was called the 'old cure', and that is what you do to the patient who has hair on his forehead, then make .iij. cuts even with the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be as if .ij. doi all along the forehead up to the nose, and the other .ij. are made .ij. inches apart above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. jawbones, and each wound is three fingers wide;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and put an sponge and mowt of drapels on it to wipe out the blood, then bottle up the spatumil from  .ij. parts where this is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	As for the incision that is to be made from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all the cur that is between the two cleavages up to the bone, and then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spike.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if it is placed in the first cleavage the instrument which is called 'chitellaire', and is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other is smooth, not sharpened, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And set the chisel-cutting towards the horse's back at the cur, and the chisel is smooth towards the bone, and the bottle as far as it comes to the middle cleavage. And scrape all the cur that descends from the head to the incision so that it is continuous until that which opens from the cur, and then do the same in the middle cleavage until the other one; and then remove it equally, and express the blood; then put into each cleavage a tent of fine cotton cloth, and put soaked drapes in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep so that the abscesses don't come; and on the third day unbind him, and impart a great quantity of cold water, and then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until he is well.
dou reume des eulz	And take off the cur
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no venereal catarrh has been contracted by habit, and you see the hairs tenacious and small, and weakening of sight, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where it falls in pain ague comes to the patient, then know that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure which is there, if this is so, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another wide incision; commence from the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the muscles that move when he drinks; and when the bone is exposed, if you suck all the blood out with a sponge, then bind it between the .ij. lips of the cut and put on some cotton wool and linen; then spread some wet drapelz over it (wraps), soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to touch an abscess; when it is exposed, if you rub the bone until it starts to grow, then cure with things that dry up, which cause char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take .ij. parts of flower of wheat, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment thereof; and administer it into these wounds to cause char all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stooping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All who have ears are of the four things: or grain, or beast, or small stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as peas and beans; or flowing thing such as water and easily flowing and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it chings in the ear, whether a stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear and does not enter it, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then pour a little violet oil or oil of sesame, then do an extraction; and what is done is to shake with heat, and stop the nostrils when the shaking comes, and put strips of cloth or wool around the ear; and raise the ear above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work, then extract it with a fine tweezers, from which this form comes:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, then extract it with a small double-ended needle; and if it does not come out with the needle, then make a thread of air and hold the head of the ear with it or a piercing instrument strongly, and stop what is inside the ear with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the thread; then try again, for many times this cure works; and if it does not work in any way, then take glut of milk, such as is used to make cheese, and put some cotton in it; then press the glut on the stone or whatever it is, and try again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out with the methods described above, then split the ear in half as if splitting an apple, and spasms; and the way to split the ear so that you make a small cut at the base of the ear, following the shape of the ear, and then put the cut part between your hands and raise the ear above, and make a small cut in the root of the ear on the fat or liquid depending; and let the cut be as thin as a moon, until you find the stone, then hold it with your strength, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is seed corn that is infected and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then administer. i.e. a sputum of thin milk according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision on that grain. But do not make it when you think the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them carefully and finely with a pin and with a scissor, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	So that the patient uses sneezing of first condisi, and ample the ear with old cotton. And it is gisans on that ear or the aigre is. if it is, it is good. If not, take many small pieces according to the length of your finger toward and light, and heat them a little at the fire; and put one or another piece in his ear, and chop from another part, and make an incision on another piece on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop making this piece after piece until the aigre comes out all, and so it goes; and if you see it, take 1.i. junon, and bottle one of the chiefs in the ear, and the other chief take from the fire until the most dou jonc is burned; then make another again with others junons until the aigre comes out all, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the arrow, if it is a small one, like a bug or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a big one that can be felt, then administer extraction by pinceures; and this is the lightest thing to be found in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you cannot cure them as we have said in the chapter on division and treatment of distillations, and if the cure is not effective, then look at the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, take a fine pin and if they do not come out, hold the ear by its shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And let it be tight below and wide above. And pour in the subtlest oil into the ear according to the quantity of the pain of the patient, then suck out the form completely; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, split them between cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treatment of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or gold tight in a small hole, and above to distill; and for pressing inward the distillation with an instrument of bronze well made so that if you see a razor, and you put cotton around the tip forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cain (cane), and the cain is in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand carefully so that the oil is distilled or the scent comes out of the ear; and smell the patient's medicine inside, and let the distillation be heated on the fire as it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the support of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by an injury from a splint [a piece of wood or metal used to support or hold something] inside the ear, or a cart falls into the ear, and this splint comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it; and there is no harm done to one, and they can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So that which comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this you should put the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has done all this skin-care with which this is formed:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful and cut off in front and behind all plain, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the operation is a splint or a bar of the ear, if you hold it with subtle scratches, and break it lightly, until this splint is all broken.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the swelling is entirely in the ear, take a fine sharp razor and warm it slightly, then put it at the root of the ear. If you feel the swelling which the patient feels as grit in his ears, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a small tent according to its width from the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not make any tent until the wound is healed, or take a small tent and soak it in rosewater, and powder it with vitriolic brooch; and if you see fluid running out of the ear, cover it so that you remove the tent and moisten another tent made of rosewater and wax, until the swelling comes out; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the discharge of blood comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that heal the discharge of blood which are or to treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the hair of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take the hairs that come in sheets when they are moist and dry, so that you stretch them with tweezers and the comb of a spitail from their roots; then put on top of the place vitriolic broid.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled off, then the fire cautery with the thin lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery afterwards after cutting out comes to rest; and many times they come back, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	from the grease
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come in sheets things that seem grease in form and hardness, and for this it is called "grandine", and is a gathering of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; make the cut wide, then the scorch of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the split is large, so cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the oilmens will soon restore it and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hair is falling out at the base towards the upper part of the ear, then flip the paper over and are the hairs to two pincers, and the cope and press on both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does no harm; and when the hair has been cut, let the oil of salt water be poured on, and cure the hole of that which causes so much pain until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	is produced when the paper is wrinkled above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears come out; and because they lie on their faces from then on, and sleep like that, and their cheeks are wet with the exinach which opens in the oil. And when you press the leech between your fingers, you feel the exirnach coming out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to use it is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen sheet, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exirnach contained in each part, and then put it on top of him; and press with your fingers from both sides so that the exirnach is assembled in the middle; and cut into the moisture with a sharp blade, making a slit of the right size for the wound made in the vein; and then close up the skin perfectly until you have brought out all the exirnach; and in several dispositions the exirnach comes from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then from all a piece of linen between your two palms at the end, and bring back your hand to the left and to the right until it is spread; and be careful not to jerk in the tear, lest you come to all the spittle up to the oil, lest you spill it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the head does not come out in the compression of the tear, then bring it lightly by half a finger so that it appears; then take it as we have said, then moisten the cloth with water and place it on its place, and strain from the bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such men grind silk and put on it that moisture which is delayed. Then the doctor cures until he is well. And if he comes to the base of the appendix, the doctor applies poultices soothingly until he is well.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in paper there grow hairs not as nature willed, and become wilted, if they harm the hairs, and bring about manner of diseases such as tears and softens the papers and albugin, until it is a cause of the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or cautery chapître, and is made or by incision and stitching or by caines, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your sound hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; if not, if you pour a needle on all .i. thread above; and let this be done of the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and bring .i. thread above all the spatumile copant, from the great tear until the little one; then take away the thread, and put the paper back with a small cotton and drape, and sign on the paper an image of an ear, as if it were the skin of a mirth, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a need that who has work do great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then do on all spatumile above the 2 lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear until the little one; and let it be an edge near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the vinegar in one of the 2 angles of the cure, then scorch it all; then assemble the 2 lips to a stitch of a needle on all thread of fine wool, and rinse the blood, and blow the excess of the threads on the 2 sorcils at all sticky things, if you see to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads until 3 or 4 days; then treat the wound without stitcher with dry and constricting things, for the paper relives at the heat of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is moist  (as the old say), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a figure who is also as the fowl of myrtle, so as we have told, there are .iij. times of eversion according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take who surmounts at little forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you have no power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take an awl or it has .i. thread, and bottle the figure up; and bottle another thread of leach's blood, and the second thread of little blood, and join them together evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the hide on which you have signed, as we have told, then join the 2 jaws of the wound with sutures, and ease it with cerots and similar abatement;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and any time that the hairs of the paper are converted: it is necessary that you use what we have said of the incision; but the suture in one and another place is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the binding becomes tight, then cure it until it is healthy; and when the wound has healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the 2 dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased away, treat it and let the hairs grow with it, so you will chase the hair away to all the thread that you have ordered it, as long as the hair comes out from above it and you see it by the sight of the oil; then, if you chase the hair and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed 1j. or 1ij., until the hair hardens in its place and the hair grows up; and if the hairs are small, so accompany 1. long hair from natural horses, and let them go with that one or you leave them, as they grow longer and then lighten them.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the porrittion comes in oil, there are 1j. ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treating this in the text is that you should split those bonds, and separate the lips of him, and put linen inside, and leave it until it heals; and you should not use anything in the cure of him that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but if you use softening things, such as fenugreek; and water or ale or linseed seeds are cooked, and olive oil is melted in any of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and cure him from that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure that you take care not to change according to the form that it was before; and the works that we have said are only valid if they are applied from this disease, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The horse that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This text appears to be a description of the symptoms and potential causes of a disease, with advice on how to treat it. The term "axacrati" is mentioned, which may refer to a specific medical condition or treatment method. The "char" mentioned could be a type of medicine or treatment, with the "aguille" and "spatumile" playing a role in its application. Unfortunately, without more context, it's difficult to provide a more detailed interpretation.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper comes according to this what is appropriate, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and cut 2 cuts or costs within the paper; and let the 2 cuts of the 2 angles of the incision that you have copied, and let be made one angle so that when they are assembled, that the figure is like the figure of a letter who has not "griesche"; then put this char, according to the quantity that its edges are appropriate to cut, from what puts the paper, then add the 2 parts severed, and the cost of a thread of wool; then cure of what we have said of the mollifying medicines, and of the tent, as long as it is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, ils leur sont arrachés les yeux pour qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
dou soudement de la papiere	de la papier
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I understand that the nail has two types: it is either nervous and resembles a hard piece of sinew, or not nervous but resembles a white piece of frozen moisture; when touched with iron and rubbed with pinches, neither can stand it; and both appearances begin to grow steadily until they completely cloud the sight, darkness and light, and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then he opens the nails; and you hold paper in your hand, then coil the nail with small double-edges, and place it above; then take a needle, and put thereon 1 .1 piece of horse, or cow, or buffalo hair, and 1 strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and place it above, and peel off at all the nail's root the thin skin that comes with the tears, leaving behind only the tears' natural thread; so that in the incision there does not come the course of tears as usual: and never are the nails tied to the thread alone, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off the thin skin from all the spatumile where it is soft and small tears, and leave behind only the tear's natural thread.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the spatumile from touching the flesh-cloth and breaking it, and the prune from being pierced; and after the incision pour a little seed oil, and of the colier made of alum, and leave it until the other day; then he cures of what it is necessary as long as it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncinous can not enter, many times this appearance of nails is cured with medicines; and they are born as I have told you in the division, and if you see them covered, then do the oil of the disease, and take the sputum lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift up the nail gently, and if you see that it thins out a little and the rawness increases, then distill from your mouth in oil made of chalk and red ochre and seer the oil until the other day; then begin again with another work according to this same way, until it is all healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is opposed to the oil, then like an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess like before until it is healthy, then begin the work again as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eye hurts in the oil by great damage, then suspend it with the uncinous, and pour out a part of it and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distill into red oil which is made of chalk.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the horse that was born on the eye
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	of the horse that was born with a red mane, and covers the eye and is restrained on the papers and turns it to the wind, and seems like a rose of a baluster; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he works the hairs, and twists all of it with suitable hooks on this, and holds it firmly; then take the first mane, and go all the way to the razor until the end, and be careful not to cut the oil on the work; and the incision of the spur that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one oste the sebel, as the form shows after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is complete and all the mane is removed, then put in the oil of seaweed or you distil it with a red color and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put on the oil to the wind with an abin of urine, so that it is assured of an apothesis; and if it does not wait for anything, and the horse rises on him, and you doubt an apothesis, then leave the oil and cure the apothecary from things that calm an apothesis; then go back to your work as long as it is healthy, and in this way do the manes are attached in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil according to natural way; and of accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the limbs are suffering from this work.
des voines des eulz	the hairs of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	the hair of the eye
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two hair in one grade according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then curl gently the hair in one grade, and wash the blood hour after another, until you see the hair remove from the oil; and keep the oil from the tips of the spatumiles, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only curl the hard ones; and when you have done this, if it is still stuck, distil into the oil green and red wine to corrupt what is stuck.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to bind all of this in that hour, so make a paste on oil of things that calm the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of the apotheosis warm, then begin again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And if you do not have the power to bind all of this in that hour, so make a paste on oil of things that calm the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of the apotheosis warm, then begin again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the top of the bone's腐敗 then turn it between your two hands and press your hand a little as long as you can tell that this corruption has stopped; and don't do this once again, then restore the place of dry medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is stuck together and the neck of the bow is also stuck, and it remains so for a long time, and does not break open again, and there is no bad smell, knowing that it is well; if this is not the case, then there is another device than to bring the fistula to the perforation of the nose according to this form: and that is that you uncover the bone the second time by means of fire, and of sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered thus, take 2.i. forethought according to this form, and let the iron be at 2.iij. angles, and let the knot be thinned up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put on the bone with delicacy the oil, and keep your hand from the oil a little, then turn it all around until it perforates the bone, and feel the patient through this so that his hand remains on his nose; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the neck is made and hardened the leus, then carry the matter to the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are fully grown, then let him be treated with fire cautery to remove the hair; and if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until the hair has grown.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	When the hairs are fully grown, then treat him with fire cautery to remove the hair; and if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until the hair has grown.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the hairs are fully grown, then treat him with fire cautery to remove the hair; and if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until the hair has grown.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are long and even, let him pierce them with a thin needle that comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture of the albugineous and shave the hairs, and go in between; then remove it until he is well.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing other than the bow that is assembled in oil, resembling astringent descending liquid, and is not acidic; and the manner of appearance of this chapter is such that you sit the patient on his seat and upright, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and let the bow come up to your hairs; then put it on firmly, and do not descend or move it; and see if the light comes out, and know that it is acidic, and that the descent of the bow is done as we have said. If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin needle and pierce it into the cornee layer .i. hole by the continuation of the connective with the cornee layer and the crown, until the bow comes out; and when it is issued, if it is distended in hot oil mixed with honey or acidic water or fenugreek is boiled and honey added, then cure it from another cure until it is well.
des aigues de l’oil	from the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation of the text:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	"Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil esto
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	"Then take the instrument called «almagda» lightly in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, or your left hand if they are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument at the center of the blight, which is located at the base of the oil, and then express a path after another.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then therefore the conjunctive only, and do not make it too large, but make it subtle, and then pour the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the sleeping coming, in that he sleeps on his back in a dark leu; and be free from all movement, and eat light meat, and do not move his head to right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until seven days; then let him lie in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then let him loosen his bonds until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you bind him, for he will go up to hospital quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then therefore the pustules only, and do not make it too large, but make it subtle, and then pour the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the sleeping coming, in that he sleeps on his back in a dark leu; and be free from all movement, and eat light meat, and do not move his head to right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until seven days; then let him lie in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then let him loosen his bonds until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you bind him, for he will go up to hospital quickly. Put oil on the pustules before the seventh day, and give them what soothes the pustule; and when they are calm, let the vision see and put an eyelid over his face for any day, and then return to that dark house little by little, and turn around in his cases; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in our country fire almagest is poured out, which sucks up the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancient ones; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them to see them; and let them be of pure brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of this middle substance be of water, and behind it in three angles be of fire.
de la char sor le neis	of the cart over the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	And there are various kinds of carts with different shapes that arise from the earth; some of them seem to be scorpions at the mouth of a well; and if there is one such or another, let you set the patient between your hands towards the sun; then open his nostrils, and pour into those chars the clear liquid, and mix it with water; then take what you have poured on, supporting it in your hands against the sun, until you know that this cart is all solid.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if it is opened to all.i. the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing stays; and without you rising up, or an abscess opening, so dry as it should; and if these are malign abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the sun is set and all the pus is drained, then pour or pour easily and strongly or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if it is opened to all.i. the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing stays; and without you rising up, or an abscess opening, so dry as it should; and if these are malign abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the sun is set and all the pus is drained, then pour or pour easily and strongly or wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a tube, and conduct it too; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be plain for cleaning the head; and have 1/10 always at the head to hold it while oil is heated or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Miltimes the neck has a disease called "telul", and grows large and becomes very painful to look at; so you must cut it open at the beginning, and burn the bone, then put fire on it; if you delay doing this when it is large, it may get hard, be yellow in color, and not have any feeling: but do not touch it with iron because that is an abscess; for if you cut into it even once, great evil will come to the patient. The abscess should be touched very lightly, not by a yellow color, and you can see that it can all be covered, so the patient is empty and does not feel pain, and cure him with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the neck is cut and cured
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	A home, within the lips, appears a hard, grainy-like pustule, small and large; therefore, you should turn the lips, split each one at the tip, and catch it with pincers, and then apply the vitriolic paste to the area until the pus is drained; and then wash it off with water, and treat the area with dry things until they are healed.
de la char des gencives	the color of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maitre de l'art de la chirurgie, il est bon d'apprendre que les dents qui ont été arrachées doivent être maintenues avec des tenailles, et la racine doit être coupée, et laisser couler le sang; puis mettre sur le trou du vitriole ou d'autres poudres qui retiennent l'humidité et séchent; et si celui-ci revient après l'incision, et arrive souvent, si la racine est coupée une deuxième fois, et cautérisée: s'il ne revient pas après la cautérisation; et voilà les formes des instruments pour combler.
des sordens	Orde de la chirurgie
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Orde de la chirurgie:
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	Orde de la chirurgie:
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Here is the translation of the text:
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out, then take any of these tools and put it inside from all sides slightly, and move it as you did first. And if the gap is wide and deep, then fill it with gauze, and place the tweezers lightly on either side; and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you must do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the malice of the root with greater pains than the first. And you must guard that you do not do so as does the ignorant patient who, because of his haste and pride, often breaks none but the carriage, and never attains to what we have told; but brings about none but great illness for the roots that he delays, or for the carriage that he breaks, as we have often intended; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the hole with wine or ale and salt; and they run away from it without stopping, so often comes a pain, if you employ the hole of vitriol broiled; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, so that the teeth do not break first, are long-tipped and thick-handled, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of strong members so that they do not bend when you pull, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold the molars in place.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root stays in place when pulled, if you put cotton and oil on the joint as well as it is softened, then the pliers which are called "algefri" seem to be a grindstone; and let them be made inside as a file and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these nails, it is necessary that you uncover the whole frame around the root, and put the instrument which is called "Althali", that is to say palanquin, so that this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be careful and strong so that it does not break, and the root goes out through this, that is good; if not, you help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument which has .ij. rays, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the reason of the nails, and of this instrument which seems a great nail, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Et soit ciste instrument est rum qu'il ne puisse briser, et saices que mot d'instruments de dene sont; et ausi d'autres instruments, qui ne sont mie compte; et li sais maîtres subtils trueve par soi mesme son instrument, selonc ceu que ses œuvres et li maladie li demoustre, car il y a de tains maladies ou li ancien n'enseignerent point d'instrument pour la diversiteit des au s et s'om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as instruments qu'il i convenit, que je t'ai dit, et t'aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold and remove; and then return him to the place of medicines convening to this, and if there is any corruption in the bone, and it is small, if the reamow has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the root is after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then take this instrument which has this form, and is like a small beak, and is of iron made:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the chaperone is small and small by the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that we can scrape it, let us scrape it with a piece like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the lime with which we make needles; and when you scrape the tooth little by little lightly, so that it does not move until it has been cut; then, at the end, all of it must be shaved with a razor, and its surface too hard and it bleeds the tongue, therefore, it is necessary to scrape the roughness as much as possible so that it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor damage speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth moves
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth moves, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press upon what he chews because it makes him sneeze; and you have cured them with restricting medicines, and that does not work; then, you should restrain it with a gold thread, because silver thread turns green and spoils, but gold never does; and make the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any toothache, pick up the thread and double it between the two teeth, then place the caps between the teeth, if there are more than one, until you have reached the sound tooth on the other side; then, restart the wrapping gently and carefully, until it does not move; and if it dessticks, or the thread rubs, then tighten it with another thread; if it dessticks and stays in place, leave it tight, and let it stay as long as possible, and if it comes loose, or the thread rubs, then tighten it with another thread; if it stays in place for a long time, and works well, and that is the form of the teeth and the figure of the wrapping of the sound teeth and the caps of the two teeth, if you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose, if you set it in its place, time after time, as we have said; and do not meddle with it who are not skilled and chịu; and never make the shape of a tooth of an ox's bone, and set it in its place where it has failed, and hold it fast as we have said, and delay and endure for so long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To remove the copper from the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No one should take copper from the tongue or nature it out, except in an accident of sore throat; and the procedures are such that you open the mouth of the sick person and put your hand under his chin, and draw the tongue; then cut off the copper from the back with a large knife, as much as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or no pain, and it is the result of an accident of sore throat, then cut it off with a sharp edge, and guard that the incision is not too perfect, lest the artery be cut; and when you have done so, take away pure rose water and cold water, then put a bandage of linen on the tongue; and dye it every night, so that the root cannot come up. And if the sore comes back, then cauterize with a lenteen cauldron, which is good for this; then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see red or black or hard color on it or not feel it, for this is a cancer; and if it inclines to blenchor and has moisture, then pour the copper in and make an incision with a fine scalpel, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the sick person comes to you, put it on vitriolic broth until it is well, then return to your procedure as much as you want; then take away the water of aise and seil, and cure it with other remedies until it is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	of the throat abscesses come from within the throat which are called "godath", and they are named properly as 1.ij. amandres, and when you cure them, if, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is an abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch with iron for the pain of blood; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it is a white color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it up, but first see if the abscess is hot and has calmed down. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his neck be straight, and he opens his mouth and puts his elbows between his hands, and presses the tongue onto all the instrument, from which this form is made; and be of silver or fine gold as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then you press the tongue onto all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the scalpel and put it in the amande, and raise it up higher than you can; and do not touch any threads with it, then cover the instrument, from which this form seems to be a sharp thing; and nevertheless the head is corbe, and one side over the other, and are very acute, and is made of iron or any other metal:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, if you cover it with pliers, from which this form seems to be a sharp thing; and nevertheless the head is corbe, and one side over the other, and are very acute, and is made of iron or any other metal:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be careful on both sides, and when you have cut one of the apples, if you cut the other according to that same way, and after the incision gargare with the patient hot water, and hot and easily, and move away from sanc coming, if gargarism with the patient's astringent, or scoops of pomegranate be cooked, or leaves of myrrh, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat him as long as he is healthy; and never come in the throat other abscesses than the .ij. apples, if they are cut just like the .ij. apples.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, a small abscess; and I had it very well closed all the way up, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for 1 day or 2. And this abscess was so high that he had been 2 or 3 rains by the 2 or 3 openings where it was coming out. So I waited a while, and put in one of the onions, then pulled it hard, and cut off a large portion of bow; then put another in the other opening from which it was coming out, and pressed her mouth shut and her tongue; then I put the onion into these abscesses, and put some in, and there came out only a little bit of blood; and so the passage in her throat opened up for the woman, and she began to drink water and wine again, and did not stop cutting off this abscess for a long time; and the abscess went back, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it got very big; then I took hold of it and cauterized it inside her throat: so it stopped growing; and I left these parts, and there was nothing but God did after me.
de l’uve	about the grape vine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain comes to the eye, and it is gone and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very big and round, it is called "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the aposteme is calm, and thin, then you should cut it; and that which is round assembled and not far away; and it is bloody or of a reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision. For there is great danger with this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, that its blenchor and its longesce, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument we have mentioned above; then put the oncine into the eye, and turn it around, and cover it with .i.i instruments that I said in incising .i.i mandrels. And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you do, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .i.i mandrels, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient fears to be covered, then you should use an instrument for cauterization when the pain is painful. The way of cauterization is sharp. And it is that the patient put his head on your well, and then he presses his tongue to the instrument we have mentioned, where there is a sharp edge, so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put your hand on his head where the hair grows, so that he can let the medicine touch his eye, as if with a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the eye; and may the patient lie on his side, so that he salivates and his mouth water comes out of the medicine into his throat, so that it does not go down to his chest and burn him; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye for an hour's half, until you see it heal and the medicine has calmed its stings; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton around the eye, until the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash it after 3 or 5 days. And if you need to clean the medicine out of the eye, if it has been put in, and after the cauterization rinse it with very cold water, and cure it with gargles until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than the incision or cauterization; if it has been cured by smoking in this way, take calamus and yarrow and oregano and thyme and chamomile and hawthorn and other herbs, and put them all together or any of them in a 1-liter pot, and pour water into it easily, and bring it to a boil; and the pot should be very tightly covered with a strong lid, and set the pot on 1 instrument prepared in this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l'uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; après lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faiches ceu au comencement de l'avenement de l'aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que à la declination d'aposteme chaut. Et si cist estrument n'est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craffe d'uef, si que li bouche au malaide n'ait mie trop chaut; car li craffe d'uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c'est bone cure ensamble salut.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Muitas vezes se arde na garganta osso ou espinha de peixe, ou nenhuma coisa; então é conveniente que você tire o que você pode ver e pressione a língua ao sol com todo o instrumento, para que você possa ver o movimento da coisa; e o que não se abre para você e está encoberto na garganta, é conveniente que você faça vomitar o doente assim como a carne é cozida no estômago; talvez, se isso não funcionar, o doente engolirá um pedaço de esponja, ou uma peça de nável, ou uma raiz de alface, ou 1/4 de pão seco; e prenda a esponja com um fio e depois a transglutir; e quando ela chegar ao fundo, se abrirá, então puxe forte; e se ela não vier forte de tudo o que dissemos, pegue 1/4 de instrumento de mergulho de acordo com esta forma:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	E seja o instrumento curvado na testa se ele puder entrar com mais facilidade na garganta e levantar a cabeça para cima; e tenha cuidado para não tocar a epiglote, de modo que ela não caia; e mova vale que o doente boğa o instrumento, para que ele faça vômito ou seja encoberto; se ele engolir, ou ele vomitar todo o instrumento uniformemente, até que ele saia.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No time is medicine for the blood, if as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not profit, then look at the throat of the patient under the sun, so that you press it with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, take a fine hook, or tiny tweezers that are worth to him. And if he is not worth, then take a piece of hair from a horse, and pour it into the throat of the patient, then pour the hair  .i. hot, and do this often. And if the patient is dark all day, then take a full pint of cold water, and open the mouth, and drink it down, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then submerge the patient in ash water, at the instrument that I have told you in the smoke of the oven; do this often, for it will not gag. And the way of the smoke is that you press a pot or it has viscous charcoal, and let the cover be torn so that it falls into the middle, and on that hole is the head of the instrument; then pour your smoke, and the patient put the end of the pipe in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the blood; and the blood will now come out, and if it does not come out, then begin the smoke again by many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty things and bitter, and do not drink water; and then the proper work is that she goes away by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument to see if one can tell, is, when one can see it, similar to hooks twisted for entering into the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's pick, and has sharpness of lime, so that whoever takes it cannot leave it; and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the ointment for abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The head of an abscess has two forms, one that is moist and the other that is dry. The moist one comes from the middle of the head, and the dry one comes from the jaw. And each has its own nature in work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If an abscess does not need to be pierced, then let it dry out as long as the swelling lasts; and if one is crut, then pierce it when the swelling has subsided, so that it will not hurt the main member. For if an abscess comes from a joint, and you leave it until it is rotten inside, perhaps the ligature and nerve of the joint will be damaged, and this causes contraction in that limb. But if an abscess comes from the principal member, then let it heal; and if one is crut, then pierce it before it has healed completely, so that the one that comes from the foundation does not rot to the end, and become a fistula, and cannot be cured well.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary that you know the time for piercing an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the stirring up of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where there is most thickening of the skin, and where it opens most easily; and let the perforation be made with a long knife, and if it is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves, and in all the limbs evenly, where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that are swollen, according to the limb. And when abscesses are in the flesh, so as they must burst, you leave the piercing until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you draw along the course of his blood, and it is full of filth; and perhaps harden the lips and deepens him. And if there is an abscess that has pierced according to the largeness of the limb, according to what the members require. It is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many splits according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover them up, and to plug; when they have been made as 2. i. drapels, and are softened, it is necessary to do so as one does with buboes: and if there are such that are split in 3. angles, and if there are such whose lips are also split like the skin of mirth, as abscesses of the angles; and if there are such that are made into a round size, and other sizes and a similar appearance of being cut.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those that are swollen, according to the limb. And when abscesses are in the flesh, so as they must burst, you leave the piercing until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you draw along the course of his blood, and it is full of filth; and perhaps harden the lips and deepens him. And if there is an abscess that has pierced according to the largeness of the limb, according to what the members require. It is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many splits according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover them up, and to plug; when they have been made as 2. i. drapels, and are softened, it is necessary to do so as one does with buboes: and if there are such that are split in 3. angles, and if there are such whose lips are also split like the skin of mirth, as abscesses of the angles; and if there are such that are made into a round size, and other sizes and a similar appearance of being cut.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the discharge from the wound comes out, you put cold water and quickly, and wet 2. i. drapels, and place them over the wound many times. And if the discharge persists, you put government and medicine, and the powders that I have said in your hands in this book, and if it is or not dry, and the leavings of the wound are very nervous, it is necessary that you put on tents and drapels wet in wine and oil warm; and if it is dry, and the leavings are meaty, you put on drapels wet in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said; and then take off the abscess and clean it and cure it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the ointment.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Here is the translation of the first paragraph:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	Here is the translation of the second paragraph:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times there is an abscess at the throat, and they open the arteries and veins, and they come from one place to another, and they are swollen and inflamed; and each scrofula is properly within its rib, as the nut and the abscess of the neck, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not want to obey health. Now, therefore, when you see one that is of a good disposition in the breast, and has a color like that of the flesh, and is silent on both sides, and is not deep; it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape each part, and there are  .ij. lips of the heart to be tied with one thread, if you need it, as we have said in the neck abscesses; and trim little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor let the blade slip, lest you do harm, and look too far ahead, lest you cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, then put vitriolic acid on it, or some powders that restrain blood, and squeeze the wound; and leave the wound until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the scrofula has hardened at its root, if there are no small scrophulas, cut them and clean them. And if there is a big scrofula at the root of the neck, it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula in its root, but bind it with a double strong thread, and let it hang by it, without causing any harm; then employ cotton dipped in unguent to dress the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you cut the whole scrofula, you must assemble the .ij. lips of the wound and sew them now, without causing any delay for the size of the scrofula; it is necessary that you bind its root, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrophulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens; and pierce in this way, following the order of the one before, then introduce tentes with unguent and similar things, so that it corrupts whoever is delayed by corruption; and when the wound has been well cleaned, if it is healthy, then dress it with unguent, covering with a cloth, as long as it remains healthy.
de squinance	Here is the translation of the text:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the lancing of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the slicing of the throat, which is called the epiglottis, be removed; and no aid should be sought from anyone, for all the veins and the pulse of the patient are in the mouth or the throat or.ij. mandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the canal of the pulse, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the stranglehold from which there is no escape does not come.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we do so with a sharp blade.iiij circles or a small slit through which the quantity of the cut does not reach the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if they are suitable for cutting the epiglottis that there is no chip, and the vase is long of it;
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cuts the cartilage as far as it comes to the chin; and avoid cutting the windpipe, unless you see something, and then cut the syfac, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe that jumps out by the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts strangulation, join the .ii. lips of the wound together, and the whole skin below the cartilage; then administer medicines that make blood flow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one must not do this as long as the throat is entirely closed up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of it brings him back to life.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot die, and he breathes through the wound, and in this way he is preserved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and so the elder instructs that the wound be kept open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in iij days or iiij
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded that the wound be sewn and healed, until it was cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw;
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young lady took a knife, and put it in her throat, and went out through the monestary door;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found it just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that it had discharged; I saw that it had not broken a vein but had come from deeper inside the body, and the blood had flowed out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried to bandage the wound, healing it until it was cured;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the damsel only became red-faced, and afterwards she returned to her usual self;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I do not know if there is fear in the surgery of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	is called "gorge hernia", and is a great hernia in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to .ij. manners: natural, and accidental; or natural has no gadgetry.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident happens according to .ij. manners, one is resembling grass on us, and another manner is resembling an abscess coming from us of arteries;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is doubt, and it does not come to operate fire furiously that in the one who is small, and prove and search all the intruder:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you prove it as well as grass our, and can not at all, if the cup, if it cups us, and tries to all his beard, if there is any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well altogether, and treat if necessary, so that it is completely healthy.
des nous	of the fire cautery
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to perform this treatment, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and so it is necessary that I make the full distinction between our methods and those of others.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the treatment is hot and fiery, until the fever and chills have passed, and then the purifying is complete; afterwards, the fever and chills subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With this nut there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains 1 [unit of measurement] syrup, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the skin, and begins also like a kernel, and becomes thick.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and all of their colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the cure of the nut, you should try and ask first about the instrument that is called "entremissoire", according to its form or the paste that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way of the investigation of abscesses is that you squeeze or more moistly place your fingers in the abscess, and turn them little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the pus, then do it according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the instrument of insertion, and take care not to break it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture runs quickly, that it be colored, so that you do it like I said with other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument of insertion no moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so you do it in a cross-wise way, and take hold of it with tongs, and scorch it lightly on each side, and leave it at rest where it lies, so that you get it healthy with the not;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot get it out healthy, take it apart piece by piece so that nothing remains still;
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if I don't stay, he returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little time, and there is no pain, but employs the wound with some corrosive water, and removes the wound, and puts on things that calm the abscess, and cures other things until it is well;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if we take a great deal of it, so that the .ij. lips of the wound are cut off, and he cures what causes it to happen;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound is opposite or other if you hurry and employ the place of vitriole broiet, and leave it ii days or iii, as long as the wound leaks, and returns to copper what has been left;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation of the text:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles used for piercing sorceresses, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and they move easily those that are yellow, and are more proven to pierce black lead in order to encircle the corbales of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the instruments are of various shapes, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are instruments that have three quarters of three manners as well;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if one has three combs and are also of three types; and if one has two combs and one comb only, and are of three types; and all of them are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these to that one does is sharp, and such ones have I who do not cut well but only from one side, because one scours the skin so as not to hurt the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these interpositionals are the alambics set in many parts, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three types: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and don't use more than one pair of shoes that are not worn out, because they are like legs, arms, nipples, elbows, and similar things;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make another small instrument that resembles the shape of a scraper, according to this form, so that you do not hurt yourself with it:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and never place it in the place that hurts when rubbing together, and never rub according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and never inflate the breasts of certain men when they tighten them, because they look like a woman's breasts:
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain lame and swelled up, and who must be cured if it goes according to this form from this line: b. until: .
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and employ the wound with medicine, encasing it, then stitch together the iij lips of the wound, and cure as long as it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and let it suck in the milk, and be softened by its size so as to resemble women's breasts, if they are made into iij knots above, by iij similar cleavages;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of which the larger line is held to the smaller one at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and give those that we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure until it is well.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not well, or the incision is not entirely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton wet in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the juice and the remaining fat have evaporated, then treat it until it is well.
des apostemes des asselles	the heels of the feet
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The cysts that come from abscesses are handled like hard scrofula or if they have ribs and contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture are to be cut according to this form, from the line B up to the line G. :
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, if you employ cotton wool and leave it there for another day, then remove all the wool, and treat with an ointment appropriate to this until it is healthy again.:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound is oozing, apply fire cautery as we have described.:
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the flesh above it is tightened, then many abscesses and also the escape of blood come about and an abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows how to recognize when it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long enough to heal completely.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel a twisting sensation; and when it is for the vein, if it feels like it is being pulled apart.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and this is crazy to cut this abscess, and most when it is dislocated at the ankle and at the knee and elsewhere, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore the treatment of iron must be avoided, and that which is at the shoulder must also be avoided, and in that which is swollen with an artery, cut through the skin above it longwise;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate on the waist as one does, and carefully separate the artery from the tissue, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert an awl, and drive it through just to the other side of the coast, and pull the artery with a double thread of silk, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point out the place which is between the 17th ties of an intramossoire while the sun does not go out who is there, and let it be free the aposteme;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then provide the cure that causes fever, as long as the line trembles;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat this with ointment coming from here, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the aposteme is by the size of the vein, then you have to have it in your hand what you can get from the aposteme all over the leather,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then put the needle through the hole that you hold in your hand, and let it have .i. a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then tie the apothecary, as I have told you, or one of the two ends to the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle on all of the apothecary to the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in three lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut off the surplus of the apothecary, then cut off the surplus of the curl and leave what is tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then pour over it with a damp cloth in wine and oil, then bring the cure of tent and ointments as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nuts
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when the abscesses come in the artery and the vein, they come to the nuts when it is wounded, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the shoulders and the arms and in all joints, and its color seems like the color of the heart, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not fully healed, but take care of it.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and do not move well on all sides, and do not go forward or backward, and do not cover with iron; perhaps there will be a contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or in front, make the skin with a spatule.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the aphesis is small, if it has nails, and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the hangnail has come off with the skin, then burn it, and then cut it, and sew up the wound, and let it heal until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	big holes hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No time has come to the belly and no other part of the body, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw. I. home who had .ij. or bellies that were more similar to mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were broken open, and they ran together with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one to be XVIII ounces in weight, and the other XVII Z. and that their incision was such that if you look at it, the patient is wet, and the color of the artemisia is bleached and moist and has a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if the cut is with a wide scalpel, and the fire cautery is ready in your presence. For often there are too great irregularities of blood, and he comes to you without delay, so hasten then to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient sweating and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of flannel, and bind it to the artemisia as we have said, and leave it for II days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the flannel to the artemisia until it copes with it, and test it throughly; and if the roots are large, then have fear at the copeling itself for the belly, but you well coped half of it,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound and keep you from covering the patch that is of fox color and poor sense and of milky milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the treatment of leprosy hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the bad blood
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	as a bad smell that comes from cauterizing a wound or a fracture of the skull, and it is on the belly and there are some of the bad smells, so as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opening of various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	and if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it towards its two ends it returns again, and sometimes if it is strained, and enlarges much at the entrance to the bath and due to great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to moisture, then it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, then open it according to the quantity:
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, then it is at the top of the thigh, and the work is that you look at its appearance, which is for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or wind:
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of the chaplet of abscesses, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his bowels and be extended on his back, then sign all around the bowel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instructs him to cut softly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	and then signs the entire limb that you have signed with your hand,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	And make half of the abscess at the top to all the great hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie a strong thread or rope of fine silk securely around it, and let us remove it.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then extend half the abscess onto the thread, and with your index finger, touch the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you feel it stuck to the thread, and if it comes off, touch the intestine at the end of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it by the root, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery is blocked or torn, and you hear a loud noise, then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and tie .ii. strands of thread, and tie the needles around that which you have made to pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess in .iii. places above the needles, and if you see, cut off the needles, and leave it there until it decays, and then remove it with a knife;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or cut it when it is soft and decayed, then treat it as you have said, and chop off the abscess if necessary;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood where you see moisture, then heal the joint of what it touches, and weld the joint.
dou chancre	and for the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	and for the ulcer We have spoken in the division about the appearance of ulcer, and how it should be operated upon with medicines, and how one should cauterize the wound; and we say that an ulcer is incurable when it is in the face or in the genitals, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancient book says that when an ulcer is in a good position to be cut, like an ulcer in the breast or in the loins, or in any other part where it can be easily reached; and when it is large and old, then one should only approach it, for I have never known anyone to cure it, nor has anyone ever cured it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the incisions, when they are in a good position to be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge any black bile; then make it well if it has manifest repletion, then afain make it well  .i. a good place for the incision; then put on your oncins or ulcer, and shave all around it, and burn all around it without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press firmly with your hand or with anything, and if the bleeding stops, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then heal it with another remedy until it is well.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	from dropsy
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the idropisia is going into the intestines: it is fitting that you should split it open on both sides of the navel, right at the top of the hand; and if the idropisia is caused by liver disease, then your split should be on the left side of the navel; and if it is caused by bile, then it should be on the right, and it is only fitting that the patient should lie on his back on the split, so that the excess does not run to that weak part.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and lift your hand up to all the spatumile between the skin and the syringe too, as if you are scraping an inch or so; then pierce the syringe until the spatumile comes out clear, and this is the leach of the water, then make it firm, and pour this instrument out, where it seems like a silver dog, and is made of brass or light iron, and has a hole in the middle. And on one side there is 1 hole, and on the other 2 holes, and on the other 1; and the head is cut so as to look like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that the authors cut the quill with:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then pour it out immediately on the instrument; empty half or a third, for if you empty more than this at that hour, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will throw up, or come near death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but pour out according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its poults mean, then try the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now for the time that it stumbles on the hole that is on the syringe, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this way; then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try a little amount of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not work any day, and guard yourself from overwork as long as it is not necessary but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him drink water, then cure him with dry medicine while he is still wet, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and blacken him with wine; and cure him with medicinal dried medicine until he is well, and cauterize his stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of water as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born who does not have a foreskin that is small or who does not have it in its place. If it comes to pass that it does not pierce at all .iij., then make a small foreskin of skin according to this form: then tie and keep it bound for iiij. days, or iiji. And when it urines, if it is not tied, let it urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he will not have any trouble, because the urine that comes strongly does not leave the foreskin closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	The foreskin that is small or that does not have it in its place, if it comes to pass that it does not pierce at all 13, then make a small foreskin of skin according to this form: then tie and keep it bound for 12 days, or 11. And when he urinates, if it is not tied, let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he will not have any trouble, because the urine that comes strongly does not leave the foreskin closed.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of this work is that the patient lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are both cut off, as long as a feather; so that the foreskin pierces in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the loss of blood which often comes, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops the blood, and cure the wound until it is well.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	come often come pus in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are both evil and not evil ones; so that you should squeeze them with one hundredth of a drop of egg white, and clean them all over, then put cotton wet with egg-yolk extract on it; then cure it with the extract until it is well.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus is evil in color and foul-smelling, then you should apply fire to it. When you have cut it off, and some of it is inside the hair and some outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it has hardened, then cure it outside. For when you cure it all together, if it is not firmly set in the foreskin, then it will come out black and corrupt in its foreskin and where the cocoon is; so you should burn all of it that is black and corrupt, then put it on a plaster of honey and flour which has been made from the bark of pomegranates and dates, then cure it with other cures until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the pain comes on, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizes so help together the 21 arrangements: that is to say, at the beginning of the pain and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or lead into the penis a string of plunk, and urinate among the patient; and when the hair comes off at the top of the penis which was not yet circumcised, or there is an abscess or an absces, then it is necessary that you scrape it with 1 instrument, until the ligatures are removed, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a very difficult case to deal with, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatulum on the top of the penis and the skin; then carefully remove between 21 and 25, and put a thin cloth of linen wet in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not dislocated by continuing if it is like the other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do it with the best work and the lightest hand for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old people did not say anything about circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and the most honorable who did circumcision at Dalar, and in strength, and in all a novelness; so it was because there are 1.2 threads, and by chance if one copes on that above and demore that dislocation.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovient copes, and is the pain double, and to the washing which is of Dalar is not assured the point of the member; and by chance escapes the nail the iron, and corrects the work, and often are born so that there is no need of washing and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	For the washing which is done in strength to all the thread of file I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the strengths cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Car when you press your hand, so that the fingers are equally shortened; but let the string be well-fixed around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think that you only bind the string around the penis with so much force, and then cause it to suffer in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then hold the string tightly between your hands straight, and stretch the forces between your hands so that the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and squeeze or rub, and turn it upwards as far as the head of the penis is in; then clean it well with the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double string, then tie another string to it; and hold it between the two strings at the second ligature to the scrotum and little finger, and tighten the ligature between the two strings, then lift the penis up carefully and turn the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let it run a little and a little, for it is the wettest; and put powder on top of the powder and over the powder  .i. drapelet is glued with a mixture of baked egg white mixed with rosewater, confited with good oil and fresh herbs, and left alone until the next day, and the cure is cured as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces in the cleaning is this: the two fingers are to be spread and cut, and are the same as long as they are evenly shortened.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing if it is when the curets run out at the incision; so that you must extend it to your nail, as if the leans make an abscess; and let it dry evenly; and if you cannot hold it on your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then let it dry.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it has passed three days, and what is at the root of the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the pustule has been cleansed, and the skin has been peeled lightly; if you can move it easily, and keep away from the part of the penis, that will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the powder of bitter things over sore places, which we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you cope too much, and it goes up, that will not harm him; cure it then, as we have said, until it is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	double retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retained urine is due to a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or a bowel obstruction, or chafing from riding in a carriage, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the chapter on urinary retention.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	If the urine does not flow, and you see the retention due to a stone at the base or neck of the bladder, then let the patient lie on his back; and let them put pressure on their back, and extend their stomach from above their back, and restrain the patient so that they can lie as much as possible; and then force the base of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine flows.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If this does not work, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use all the instruments that are called 'syringes', which have the following form: and let it be very light silver, as the feathers of an owl; and let the cannula be a palm long and half, and very fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way to express the urine is that you take a double thread of silk, and tie it at the tip with wool or cotton, and pour the tip of the thread into the syringe; and drain off the excess of the wool and pour it into the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and a little cumin, and make the patient sit up, and moisten the bladder and urethra with oil of olive and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then hold up the syringe lightly in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the buttocks; then pour the syringe before the bladder, and let the urine flow into the thing that is empty, and this is not done according to this order but only because the person who leads him or she goes there twisted; then tie the thread all around the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it firmly, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and start again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and the patient remains calm.
des maladies de la vessie	for diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or sores come to the bladder, or rust is formed there, and you pour there water and medicines, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is in this form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	She is closed, and if it is .iij. split: .ij. from one side, and .i. from the other, as you see; and let his hair grow by which the medicine stops well the beard without addition, if we can draw out the moisture, and throw when necessary is.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the healer in the moisture, and draw while doing so who is behind; if you will draw the moisture at the healer, and then throw back strongly the one who is behind; if it will enter the moistures behind, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle enema by which the bladder is enema: if it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	and it is silver or oak, and is the head above; and desoz to 1.i. side or the ties chiet; then take a bladder of sheep and put the moisture which you see to enema the bladder, then lie between the 1.ij. sides form of a good double thread, and heat 1.pocc that the moisture on the fire; then bottle the chief of the enema in the beard, then strain your hand on the bladder all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you have no bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into .i. a circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then run .i. a strong thread through these perforations, then join the circle together as one would join .i. a dal, and put in there what you will of oil and moisture and water, and tie it with the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the division of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between the stone in the lower parts and all other signs; and how one must work when it comes to the bladder and the womb; and I will tell you openly and briefly about that.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtleness; and it opens easily, and rubs the patient's womb, and scratches it many times, and then becomes smooth; and it is light to recover the health of the children until they are 24 years old, and heavy for the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to clean the patient with a hot poultice so as to extract all the pus that is in the intestines. For he never seeks the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and move them up to the chest so that the stone comes out of the bladder completely; then do not let it rest on its own; then make it sit between your hands, and remove the clothes from his legs, so that the bladder hangs down towards the ground; then examine and touch it.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut above the stone. And if it doesn't come out with touch, then moisten your right index with oil from your left hand, since the patient is old and mature; then pour it on its base, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, so that the water goes to the neck of the bladder; then press with your two fingers, and pour it out at the end where you felt the cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to stretch with his right hand the anus up above, and with his left hand hold the skin that is beyond the anus in the part where one cuts; then pour the liquid, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make a notch between the pubis and the pelvis, not in the middle but at the cost of the left leg; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two legs should be close together or against the pelvis, and the size of the traver should be wide from the outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	In case the press should fall away from the foundation, so that it does not work; and know that there is a part of stone where it has angles and edges: this is bad for extraction; and if there is a part which is round like a globe, resembling a ball and a circle, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	On the other hand, if there is a part where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not fall, so that you can extract it with pliers which are like a file at the end, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you should use a sharp knife, cutting into it; and if you cannot grasp it like this, then open a small hole, and if it is broken, so that the extraction of vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one stone, first bottle the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cope it up, then cut it off, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any. And if it is very large, so that it should be made to come out, and make a larger wound; for 10 things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out suddenly by the way that the leach does not hold; but nevertheless you force him to extract him, or with pliers, as long as you extract him in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, if it pleases you employ the ointment of myrrh and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on .i. a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water to soothe the abscess; then unbind the patient from his neck, and do not untie the bond until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, if you raise it up well with oil and water, then treat the wound with dapanicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and frosts of blood in the bladder, and if this is held back, which goes out in a certain way with urine: then put your finger in the wound, and take out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and burn it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And then raise the wound with water and sand and mud, and help it in all ways that you can until it is healthy; and it is necessary that, for every hour that you cure it, you bind the legs together, and put the remedies on top of each other.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it lies in the tube of his urine, and does not come out; then he who I said above, that you cut many times, is excused from cutting because of this cure. I have tried it like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and be it in three angles,
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a file and place it in the tube of his urine at the base of the stone, so that it does not come out; then push the file lightly into the penis at the base of the stone; and turn the file back to your hand, poking it gently, until you can pierce the stone from another part; then very soon the urine will come out, and he will be cured. If it is suddenly broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this with any tool that hurts it, take a file and place it in the stone at one end, and another on top of it; then pull out the file forcefully, and remove the file thread from its place, and wash the frozen blood that is in the wound; and heal him until he is well.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	May a stone be found in women, and if it is not found, there is great difficulty: the first is that the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who can go to the physician's house, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman' stone is more perfectly formed than the man' stone, so that one must make a deeper cut, and there is great fear with it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessary, send for a midwife who is well-informed, and if you do not find it, ask no more. If you cannot find a well-informed midwife, order a woman who knows a part of the art to make the stone for you; and order her to make the stone from the inquiry of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and observe well that his wife is a virgin: then he should put out his thumb or foundation and seek the stone; and if she does not hold it, he will remind her that she puts out her thumb or with the disease, and wants and presses his left hand on the bladder formed.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she does it, then let her move it slowly from the entrance of the bladder to the root, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh; then put your hand on the stone at the center of the leg, where it is broken, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your thumb above the stone or off it, and cut it small first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then cut the root of the leg where you feel the stone, if it comes out easily, then know that there are many types of stones: some are small and some are large and rough and some are long and round, and some have a point. If you know their appearances, then know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not come out, then put it in vinegar, and hold it for an hour until the stone is removed; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have tools that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if it does not come out, and this is the artery that is torn, then sprinkle the powder on top and squeeze out blood and pus, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, because by chance the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has abated, and the place is open again, if it returns to your work, until the stone is far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernias that cause pain
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	is made from water or white milk that is mixed with the seeds of fennel, which contains the essence of the onion; and is called "syfac", and never properly in the tapestry of the onion itself, if one believes that it is another type of onion; and this milk of the fennel between the white milk we have spoken of; and this one does not come out.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the procreation of this ramose thing is so of weakness that comes to coions, and is spread out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And so often comes of percussion on the coions, and this moisture so many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous whites, and such happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of distemper this gathered together, for if it is or white as we have said, then it is the apostemes reons, that is to say, short and like an ox, and does not open the coions, because it has moisture all over.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper toil, then it is the apostemes reons with a part of the uff, and for this one thinks that it is some other uff;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white syfac, so does it smell bad; so when you know how to determine the color of the moisture, test it on all the inguinal region, because its form is before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the inguinal region, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then make him lie on his back on a high thing, and put a lot of blankets on him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then make him sit on his left side, and command the server to sit at his right, and spread the girdle over one of the two hips on the armpit of the scrotum;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	and take the spatule and peel the skin of the cow among them to the long until you reach the knuckle, and let your cut be straight in peeling the skin of the cow up to its white, and scorch it carefully according to the place.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the skin of the cow flat with water at a large hole, and extract all the water, and then put your nails, and raise the skin up; and do not touch the hair of the cow but only the skin itself; peel it piece by piece carefully so that if you don't peel it well enough, the water will come back.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the skin springs back to your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished working on the skin; and join together the two skins of the cow with one stitch, then heal it like the other wounds until it is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the skin is corrupted by another disease, then you must hang the vail that covers it, in doubt of the corruption of blood; and peel the cow's side at all the vail, and extract the skin, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is mixed in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then cover the other part likewise as you have done with the first, then wash the blood away and put in another wound wet in oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put elsewhere another wet wool in wine and oil, and put on the two branches, and cover with double cloths, and lay it on all the chain which is according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take 2 cloths, and stuff them with sheepskin according to this shape, and are joined by stitching in the loin of the pants, and one of the shoulders rests on the base until the back, and the other at the shoulder part; and the other two heads rest on the 2 angles, and is all assembled by the loop of the pants;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and there is no time that this medicine of the ramice of cautery in the place of a size of iron, and it is that you press 1 cautery scalpel, and cope the leather of the branches, and is heated as we have said, so that the white syrup that contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you use the fire cautery as described in this chapter, pierce it with needles, and burn it with this subtle fire cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And coat it in all the ways you can, until it is completely dry; and be careful that the fire does not touch the urethra; and know that this operation is safer; and do not let blood flow from the incisions.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or bleeding or another thing; then treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	and if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then know that when you are sure by the signs we have said that the ramose water is present,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If you set the patient on fire at .i. seat take off; then pierce the abscess in the part of the buttock to all of the skin large, and put the piercing from the long neck; and let the openings be wide so that all the water runs out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton in the place, and tie it on, and leave it to run the remaining water out, then cure it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the wound does not allow water to run out of it through the mouth of the wound, then you should put a feather or an instrument used to draw out water from the dropsy there; and widen 1/7 of the wound, and know that the water returns, and is collected again after 5 days or so, and when it has been assembled as before, and in this way the patient will get better after his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess with nails
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	I am aware that in this chapter of the herb, there are many fears; so I think it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from riding horses, and most often from sitting; and this happens for the most part.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to be understood: by acrid and bitter superfluity that is spread in the bowels, or from impact; or
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and is the color of the appendix according to the color of the heart; and does not ache, and the appendix is painful.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and in some cases there is a painful and painful appendix with an unusual color and never comes from a nerve or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a nerve, if it is known by the position of the appendix, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and only comes when you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Cil qui est fais d'enflure de voix est connu par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can do well on this scale, and on the other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and is that you put the cure on the scale, then the egg at the top, and the trial strong of the white liquid, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already soded with these new characters, then it is convenient that you take the egg and its cure;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is dry, or in those who are inside the vessels, you must deliver all that is held, and the cup resonates.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is behind, you must cope all, and extract the amniotic fluid, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, if you apply wool soaked in oil and wine to the wound, then apply other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the appendage of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is the translation of the provided text:
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient groans when he goes;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this disease is so well prepared that it is like the one before, with great fear;
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you have the sick person sit on .i. a healing mat, then pour the suspension of the seeds down your throat on both sides,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	all the vessel that are next to the penis, and make them turn and extend them correctly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then chop the spatula with a sharp edge on both sides of the vessel, as much as it is uncovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then I take an awl or it has .i. a double thread, and fasten it to the first hole where his sight is coming, and fasten it soon to the other head.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut the skin in the middle right, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound like the others, so that no vassal cries out because one of his joints is not moving;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there comes no harm, and all the vassals come with their joints, so it is necessary to draw the joints of all the vassals;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	that so they do not lose their nutrition by cutting the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The following are the avemen of this chapter: that so by section there comes out syrup, or extension on the belly in the part of the entrails, by which the intestines descend from that section to one of the loins;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this section is where the syrup comes out, or the extension of it, and these .iij. ways come from causes: from percussion, from jumping, from braying, from lifting a heavy load, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it's about the extension of the medicine, if it's that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come all at once;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscess is even until the end, so that the medicine rushes to the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's about the section of the medicine, that it brings on sudden pain, and the abscess appears different, showing through the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the course of the medicine going away from the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there is no time for the circle to come with the intestine, and it is kept in place, and causes great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron from fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the bandage is that you command the patient that he keep his intestines in his hand at the wound, if he can reinsert them;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then wrap it tightly around his neck between your hands, and gently remove the bowels;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then raise it up, and strip off all the skin of the intestines;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	and bottle within the loins of the waist according to what you have need to open the wound, and be such that the oil can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	and scorch away the leech that is on the skin of the genitals, as long as the white leech's flesh is uncovered from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	and bottle the two fingers together in that which is beneath the genitals, in that which is between the white leech's flesh that is uncovered from the skin of the scrotum, and between the second white leech;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and depart that which is behind the scrotum, and between the second white leech; and then move your right hand within the loins of the waist, and place the white leech at the top of your left hand, and hold the skin of the scrotum in front of the right hand;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command to the minister that he extends the bow upward, and to dislodge who is behind the tie.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel your two sides if there is any of the intestine wrapped or white syfac hard, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the belly desoz;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or there is .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and the bottle in the back part dou syfac, which is after the leather of the testicles; after the size, then cut the hair that appear of the threads, until there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then put together one on top of the other in a cross-shape, and tie the syfac, of which we have said is desoz the leather of the testicles, with a strong thread of .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the fillets and bind them together with .ij. parts, so that none of the vassals who feed them can enter into us, for the abscesses don't come out.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and attach it very firmly according to the first long .ij. of that, and after these .ij. strings leave a little gap which is large enough for the staff of two;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the rest according to the roundness that the horse carries; then cut in the part which is in contact with the skin of the saddles, until it no longer hurts, and bend it as we have said above;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then put moist wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and there put the string that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is cauterized with white of egg that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leaves the ligament as long as it is stretched by itself; and if it delays in stretching, then let it be raised by hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it stretches.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from hernial hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	I have never seen anyone who dared to make a cure with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient ones said that it is done like this, as one ties together the rope, in a similar way to how you tie the ropes, after cutting them very lightly at the end.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut it short, and heal the abscess from this one who is wounded, as much as the ropes flow; and heal it as we have said, until he is well.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No times comes the ruture of the angers, as we have said, and open them; and do not let any of the intestines come out, and if any come out, it is little, and repair every hours; and for l’afaire de li corc, il i a poc pour le mal, et s’il en i plus, ne le par, car c’est mortel.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and wherever it stays too long at this point, he believes the wound or syrup, as long as the intestines go out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and if by extension of the syrup which is in the arteries, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and swells up its veins and openings;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure if it is by cauterization, as we have said before; and never is cured with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then spread the salt along the line of the wound according to the quantity of iij. dos;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then remove the medicine which is above the skin that follows, and then take the rod and place it on the apparent place of the medicine;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then press it perfectly in the belly, and cut the .ij. apparent lines of the medicine on top of the head of the rod, and cut both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then remove the head of the rod, and do not cover the medicine or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the رمیه of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then cure it with the cure for wounds. And when you cover the hairs, if the wound is well and the wound is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syrup is constricted, and has no appearance in the laceration; the cautery is moistened in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often, the leather of the shoes becomes soft in certain men, so that the nuts that are inside are softened and can be seen; and it is a craft, when you clean them, to put the bad nut on his back, and soften the leather which is natural over it; then assemble the 1.2. lips at one seam, and cut off the excess, seam by seam, firmly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy, and tie the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Saiches that chastisement is prescribed in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary to speak of it only in two ways: one is that the horse should answer when questioned about its own cure; and the other is that, since we often have needed to chastise certain animals for our aid, such as sheep, goats, and dogs and others. Therefore I say that chastisement is done according to these two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make the horse sit in warm water until its joints are softened; then grasp them with your hand until they have recovered and you no longer feel them. From the taunting of the size: it is necessary that you tan the animal, and press the leather of its joints to your left hand, then tie the suspension, and cut each hoof one at a time when you have well dried them; and do not leave any pot of strong medicine and subtle medicine that is over the hoofs; and this way of chastisement is milder than the one done by attraction, because it may happen that something of the joints is lost in the latter, through which the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	I have never seen them before.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	of the tetanus
de erratique	of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	of the erratic
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
des apostemes de la marris	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
de l’enfantement	Here is the first sentence translated:
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	"Mestier est premier à la baile que l'on connaisse la figure de l'enfantement naturel, et les signes qu'il est quant l'on voit la femme s'approcher et désirer sentir l'odeur du pain ; alors le bébé se précipite ; ainsi tu sais que cet enfantement est selon la figure naturelle, et l'enfant sort par le haut, avec le deuxième ; et lorsque tu vois ces signes, il convient de presser légèrement son ventre, afin que l'enfant naisse rapidement ; car lorsqu'il descend sur le haut du corps, le deuxième arrive avec lui, et la naissance a lieu naturellement ; les excréments sortent en même temps par une bonne purification. Et ce qui vient autrement ne vient pas naturellement. Car il ne vient jamais par les jambes, ni par le cou, ni par les mains, ni par le ventre, ni par la tête, car il arrive parfois sur le col, et par d'autres figures méchantes ; il est donc utile à la baile de savoir comment aider dans ces situations, en évitant les erreurs et les tromperies. Je vous montrerai toutes les figures comment on doit procéder."
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out naturally and the mother cries out, then the virtues of her loins are weak, if she sits on a saddle or women hold her; and when his oil or fenugreek is cooked, then pour the milk between her two small testicles, of which this is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And split the second one, and cover his fingernail with oil until the moisture comes out; and press her belly until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, then clisterize the woman with fenugreek oil and sesame oil; then make her sit up and shake off the mucus, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then now the baby. If his hands are hard to enter, then put the woman on a .i. seat, and let her stand on her feet; then take the seat away from the ground, and turn the woman over, so that she does not fall when she stands up; and if his hands cannot come in, and the baby dies, then cover his hands with the knife that is placed here before, and pull out the baby, and make it even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the baby's delivery on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby comes out on its feet, if it is necessary to put it upside down:
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn slowly, as long as they are even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then squeeze and stretch little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	So that it can jump just as the fingers are stretched, if it is ordered to stretch, and make it vibrate with the hand.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If you jump, then God will see you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we said, if the turn slowly and little by little until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come so as we said, if one takes muscle of elder, and oil of santonica, and gum melted, and grinds all in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the nature of the woman within and away this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then let it sit in warm water until it soaks through the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is soaked through, then let it be wrapped in a piece of cloth, and leave it alone for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then let it sit on a pillow, then let him shake and hold his mouth and nose closed, and squeeze his stomach lightly, because the attack is now over.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child on its knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child arrives in this form, if I put his hands on his hips little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	and then be tied to his neck, and his feet hang down, and he is carried thus;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then he puts his hands on his belly, and then the bones are removed from him until he is completely empty;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and then the child does not run, if he takes his feet and makes his body flat, then his body is flat on the belly, and then he puts his hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and the baby bites little by little; and instruct the woman to lactate until the child is weaned.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the delivery of the baby who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I come to repair to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, if the woman does not lift her leg, and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	Here is the translation of the first sentence in the text:
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	and then apply the muscle stretching that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she is pregnant, then make her sit down on a chair, and study how to bring the baby into the world;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and then make the child face up according to natural form, and have him stretch out, and instruct him that he should stretch out until the baby comes out;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child upon his neck, and had spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the doctor wash his hands, then turn his palm slightly at a time, and wipe it lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is even, put the ointment of salt and oil on it, as we have said, then order him to move slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the face sit on the seat, and order him to bend it; and the face shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this method of treatment for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this way of treating all the second part, if you wrap up your finger with cloth so that there is no moisture, then
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it is wrapped around his face and neck, and the cloth is pulled tight so that it doesn't slip, and the man dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	and then put the child inside, as well as you can, and instruct the woman not to weep:
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore if it has been dislocated slightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the origin of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Says that twins are often born, and never born only once or twice; and this is not a strange thing, but happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live long, if their names are not known.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are many, and are dislocated by the fire that is applied to them, which is attached to the wood.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never happen naturally like all of us do, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it happens gradually, as we have said, and be careful and make it quickly and lightly that what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it deserves for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Many times the formation is done in the womb i.e. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii. or viii. or ix. or x. up to xv. and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and know that the ball knows everything because by chance similar things come;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so do according to what is fitting for him.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose child has died and her womb is still, as I said in the chapter on delivery, and she does not deliver, and you are forced to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary for you to know that the woman is of sound health, and there is no accident where she might fear death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary that the woman be seated on her heels, and her knees bent downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and let the minister treat the rash of one-half, or she will lie in bed so that she is not treated with the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil with musk and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muscadines;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then pour into the vagina lightly, then choose one-half of the oil or she pours in that is suitable for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care if it is dressed and arranged so that it falls on his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if it pricks its eyes or its throat or its mouth or its palate or its larynx or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it falls on its feet, it sticks itself or grabs and hurts near the ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it should hold the object with its right hand, and place the claw between the index and middle fingers of its left hand, and gently stick the object onto something empty;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	this is the shape of the claw:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then place 1/8th of an ounce, or thereabouts, on each joint, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then extend them evenly in both directions, so that they come out, and the joints hold together, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	If one part stops, then oil some of its two ends and pour oil on that part, and draw the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if one doesn't stop, then put this ointment or higher up, and do so until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back because of the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	So that you wrap him in a cloth, until he is completely dry;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then place the bandage at the joint of the foot or to the wrist, and in the other hand, do the same for the other leg;
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is straining at the birth, or it has an acute ache
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it is necessary for you to place the thorny spatule between your two, and to draw out the sharp head;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or take it with the instrument which is called "almidah", from which comes the form with the instruments or paste which follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so also I make it grow naturally with a sharp head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then draw the bones with nails,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head jumps out, and is pulled by force, so it is cut off, as long as the moisture which was there comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, so split it into pieces that you can take out.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is puffed up in the belly or over the ribs, so that you pierce it as long as the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is stuck to its own pieces, so that the pull is light, and it is brought up to the mouth of the mare with ease.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, so that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that it contains;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if another member is dislocated and the head remains in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	so that the hand of the person who grabs it completely leaves the arm, and he pulls it to the mouth of the arm,
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	and I will pour one measure of wine or water, and let it rest;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if his mouth is tight with a hot plague that has come to him, so that he cannot work,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then must be provided moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and provide them with plasters, and cut in water,
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it strikes him on his side, and you can put it in line, then bring the child that we have spoken of in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one does not have power, so one would be a man, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring the following that we have spoken of in the chest, which comes from the mare;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if it comes from the sea, then put it in water and hold it back, and bring other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had dead babies, then another咨询 on that one, and rejected the death of the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the wound swelled and began to putrefy.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called in to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong poultice, and it took some time, then another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much at this, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I wanted to heal the wound, and with great care, until the woman's condition improved somewhat;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and waited for the woman to be a little longer, and there was a little bow in place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have written this chapter on the ointment except for one thing, that when the master sees a strange thing, he may know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	How to return the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the form of the pressor, how one should hold the books; and at two turns to the two shoulders of the two legs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be thinner than the restrictory part, and made of elm or boxwood; and
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and his mouth of fur 1 . i . two broad , and the margin of the trees 1 . i . must , and long a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the 15  . ij  . leemnes be two ajostemens of this same fur  , which are closed on one side and on the other, a palm and a half long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two ajostemens are closed in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the 15   . ij   . horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the teeth;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and let there be .ij. joints .ij. supports, if you see, of a palm long, and .ij. two wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you open the pelvis with all the instrument, if sit down the woman on 1 . i . bed, the legs during and the legs open,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put together  .ij. supports in the pelvis, and hold the head of the instrument between her hips;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand with all the instrument, if you have done it as nails evenly, according to the quantity that you open the mouth of the pelvis, until the ball goes out what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are completely assembled, and varied according to their appearance; and when you have put them together, the operation is all the more quick and all the higher in terms of quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare these instruments, it is not excusable because of their necessity.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second is held back at birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to keep her hair in place, and then make her sneeze with a pinch, and hold her hands away from her mouth and nose; and si tu veu l’assaincre avant qu’il naisse, il est necessaire que tu mandes au malaide qu’il leure de sa mere par ses nages, et puis tu le feras s’assaincre par ton aise.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if he cries because of the pain, it is good. And if she does not cry, it is necessary that you command the patient to let go of her hair, and then make her sneeze with a pinch, and hold her hands away from her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of the pain, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, if he can, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the wound, as calamus, rut, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all of these herbs, or none of them, are boiled or put in water on the fire; then place a stick or lid over the pot, and another one at the mouth of the wound,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let the vapor come out from inside the wound; then make him sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If so, immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and does not get better, order the nurse to soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk of aloes, and then let it dry out in the air.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, if she pulls it and extends it little by little properly, so that the joint does not move at all during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must be moved lightly from side to side, and then pulled; but it will come out easily.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the patient's mouth is dry, we have spoken of the treatment of swallowing, and of inhaling the smoke of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all those which we have said, so that you do not go astray in the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the cunt of the woman, then the cautery with fourfold ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if she gets up and comes again, but nevertheless, when she lies down, if it causes a bad smell in the stomach and in the head of the sick person, and bleaches the sick person.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So that it is necessary to apply appropriate fumigations: neither of the ancient medicines have proven effective in fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument, so it is smoked with the retention of the flowers and the second, if this is:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like to see a dog, and put the top fine in nature, and wide-set on fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet felt the foundation pierced, but it has been stopped by a subtle medicine.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary for the bailiff to pierce that subtle medicine at his right hand, and he does not pierce it with a spikelet, and bind the lacing so that it does not touch him;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dip in dry land in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until he is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, put or pierce a stick of wood, and leave his hands open, and let it be broken when the child walks in the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes a sudden shock of pain from the wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover that shock: if not, let it be treated as we have said in the book of plied wine.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from the base are hard and painful, and those that come from the space between the 10th and 11th parts, or in the space between the 7th and 8th parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, if opened, and with cool water or a thin bow, or
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and never does this produce any fistula; and it is known by whom it is that there is effusion or windiness when the patient has effusion, and perhaps in jumping up.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and if it is a fistula that enters just up to the bladder, and just up to half the penis; and it reaches up to the join of the scrotum, and just up to the nape of the neck.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so one knows that a fistula is perforating at the base, and not perforating:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you stick your little finger or foundation, and stick a fine silver or iron needle into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is a twist, then I pour a fine paste, or .i. horsehair, until you feel the paste or hair in your mouth;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and does not come out of the perforation, windiness or pain, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	that it does not pierce, but be careful in your treatment.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And if the fistula is piercing until the bladder or the conduit of the urine, so that when it urines, it cannot hold back by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	She is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, so let it be brought up to the place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the pain comes from within, that it has already been drawn out by bowing, and there is no medicine or quick remedy by touch;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent pustules there is no cure except work, and the vain vanity of foolish mirages that interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are not persistent and are not old, there is hope of health by travel, as I have experienced,
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and so the sick person lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs until they reach his thighs, and lets his thighs bend toward his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour a tent of water, or of mud if there is curvature, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	Then let the sick person lie on his back with his feet toward the foundation, and so that you put your two fingers.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then feel that the tent has been perceived; and whether it is covered or not between your thumb and forefinger, then you know that it is persans;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If not treated, they cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should treat all of them well, but this is difficult to do; however, it can be done for some.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid that can be given is to heat the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is said above.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And the bottle should be brought up hot in the fistula until it comes out clean from the bottom; and do this .ij. times or .iij., until you know that these charred feathers are burned, which look like an owl's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the healer of damp tents wets, until it chatters, and then the healer of ointment grinds and binds.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is thus healthy, that's good. If not, otherwise he cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if he tries it between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the root, and at the bottom of the tent there is a thick covering of hair or of silk, and you see the fistula to that one who ensues in the covering from two sides;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the cover of the encumbrance of the fistula, and seals it tightly before the tent, and then treat the cauterization after, until it comes to the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and will be delivered the trial, and chertitude; then curse those birds' nests that seem a quill of an owl, and remain nothing.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun does not go out, and cut between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauteryجمعت اثنين من الأشياء الصعبة: حرق هذه الرؤوس المتشابكة، ووقف نزيف الدم الناتج عن فتحة العمود الفقري، وجفاف الإفرازات.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then the cure of wet tents will dry or fry them, as long as they pour water on it, and put fire to these heads in the water;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then heal the wound with herbs and dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes up to the very foundation, and is separated from the body, it should be cut off at the root, and see this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tickle, and enter. There are three ways to administer it:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	ou tu le cauterizes so com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc'a fons, ou sè tu pês si i met tentes et cure si com premier;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't go too deep, so you don't cut the foundation that holds it, and let the discharge come out by itself with a gentle push;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case it gets worse, or you remove the covering and clean it completely from the foundation, or with a tool, point it;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	and then my true faith this wood from the wound, as well as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the distant part of the foundation: this is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And never are fistulas according to this method; and is when you plug the tent into the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation of the leather above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour one part of salt into two parts of water, and pour the liquid in the funnel into all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that hole, so that you pour your two or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and tie the head of the thread, and join together all the seven joints together, and separate one from another, and leave it for a day or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it not at all, until the thread has passed between those that are two, and they rub;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	if the fistula does not pierce, if you can make it pierce in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too completely closed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not fit to make the lacing cover completely, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinus bone out of which one makes the fistula if it is sharp and pointed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, for this reason we do not cover what we should not cover, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	are according to its manner: they are inside the fundament, also like grain of resin, and have small and large ones, and cut them at an angle.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, and are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture, so they are hard and sharp, and cause pain when they press upon anything.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then again where there is a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood, and it has the color of the flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them deep in the foundation, so that you command the patient to sweat by going to bed, as long as the foundations go away and the seeds are released;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and cut it like nails, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then chop it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligature cannot hold them in place due to moisture, take them with .i. drapeil, or cotton, or a piece of chamelon;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and take them from your two hands, then chop them, and powder them on some hot powders that are in the place of cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as said or with the paste of cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, so cauterize the patient with a caustic and bitter paste to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the patient's wound is deep, and his bones are strong, then the cure is lighter;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you press them with your fingernail or tweezers, and pick them up, then clean them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you bring the suture together in this way: take a .i. twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then wind the thread around the top of the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the .ij. ends of the thread through the needle,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is wide; and tighten the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same to all of them, and leave 1 to stop the blood flow;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation .i. cloth moistened with oil or wax, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest until it has healed, and when it is healed, if they treat with ointment and other treatment, as long as it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Do not cut off the hair at the root.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times the hair falls out at the roots, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you rub the point of a spitball or your nail on your fingernail, which does not let it get moist;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and treat him as long as he is sore, as it fits.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot be made well, then begin to shave again more strongly than before, until the skin has healed and is burnt.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat him as long as he is well.
dou fremit	and the pain will go away.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fingers are a small appearance in front of the body, and they grow very well.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never does the vein burst, and one feels it as if dead, and it spreads throughout the whole body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a strong vulture, and place that feather on the wound, until it turns purple all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over the feather completely until you have covered the entire wound, and seal it completely, and rub the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so make it of iron or brass according to this shape, and be subtle in size and run on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	and do not pierce it, so that you keep it in two, and press it; And if you see, so cauterize the pain, as it is before or with fire-cauterizing:
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the blister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one should make a blister of silver or brass, or of melted lead or quicksilver; nor should you make these small and large instruments according to the needs of those who will use them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These children, then, who are weak and suffer pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the catheter is small and great it is over wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and I have an opening or the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the chest is pierced through one side, and on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly or I put the medicine of a bottle of wine or parchment, and is pierced all around small openings,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each hole there should be a space, then pour into these holes a strong thread of twisted wire in 10 or in winding it around, and join the abdomen as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, so that the instrument lies in front of a strong thread, then cauterize; and it is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or olive oil or some other substance is applied to the head of the cauterizer, then pour it lightly:
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	and then the minister applies the cauterizer to his both hands together until it is completely filled, and then removes the cauterizer, and places the patient's legs against the wall,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps all night, then it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him with the disease of decay in the belly, and the medicine is hastened to come out, if it is repeated as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, so the cauterization is as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the shape of the subtle cauterization where the skin is tightened:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken above of the treatment of wounds; now we will speak of the treatment of hands and medicines, according to the process.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and for this reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things for which wounds are made are by the striking of a stone, or the height of a spear or a knife, or a lance or a staff or a sword, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	"Here are the directions for treating various wounds according to the sections of the text:
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	"I say that when a simple wound appears on the head, and the bone is not broken, if it is from falling from a height or from similar causes, and the skin is partly torn and the wound is large:  "
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt slightly about the abscess: if it is little blood from the wound that comes to the head, and the blood goes in the opposite direction of the part that has been pricked;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and let the patient abstain from wine and meaty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not drink, if his meat is diminished, and he drinks no wine, neither does he eat cheese;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if an abscess comes, cotton wetted with oil or wine of stinging;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, if it is put on the wound, if it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the fire has moved it, if it is put on some ointments, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenderness, if they are brought together by sewing, as I will say for wounds from the belly, from the sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it stands out, and it holds only a little, then cure the wound with medicine, and restore it with hard leather instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and command the patient to eat large meats, as tested and baked wheat, also like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or burn rust, and it has not reached the bone, then chop off all of it, and throw it away, and then cure it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, from which blood cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find a dislocation, like the thread of a rope;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put this powder into them so that it hardens in such a way that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of this powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood 3 parts; live coal 2 parts, and the powder finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and hold it firm, until it is well healed and has joined together all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it undissolved, if it swells; for the medicine should not be applied until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should not do any castor oil, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but that the arm has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arm has moved the wound, surely it is infected, even if one does not put any of this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some distilled water, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with other remedies until it is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with very small tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you after this about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the throat
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound in the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the throat is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a newborn, if there is no other device but to leave the healing, and do not put any restraint, for it hurts the newborns and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not place on the wound anything is cold, for the substance of the newborns is cold, and their flow is with the skull, which is the most high limb;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be made, if like hot water in soft water, and mixed with oil of roses, and washed too in soft water;
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of mineral according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then the cure until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and the wound is full of bowels, if it pierces or goes deeper;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut, and blood loss occurs, if it becomes dark, and the blood stops, and the cauterization is done properly;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the throat is cut, or if it bleeds, and the direction is kept, so that the meat does not spoil;
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If cautery is applied to the chin of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then slowly remove it, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with herbs until it is healthy again;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if there has been an impression of the bone, then apply pressure to it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, then if you can't hold them fast, and those that you cannot hold fast, leave until the wound has pus;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let the discharge be kept under control;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as described in my chapter on the powder.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a sword or an axe
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then observe the patient’s breathing: for thus you shall know that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh in all its strength, then put the powder on him at first hour, nor bind him with bandages so that he does not die completely.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to bed, and let the patient rest.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put on a wound dressing, and bind it three times a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no wound, put wet cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient lie on the wound 1 . i . jurs, or 1 . iiij., or more times;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, no bad trembling of the heart or strange movements;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the ulcers of tents and other cures as long as he is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot be healed, and operate, then know that there are fistulas; so heal it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision with a blade or knife, and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then heal what is before;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has caused pieces to come off, then heal the wound, and the deep wounds if they are not healed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, let the wound run its course, and the extractions are uniform.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds and other limbs the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The double rupture of the abdomen is great, middle, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound, no less often than the intestines, or where the intestines are located, so that there is no intrusion of water;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitch is more difficult and no less painful than the small wound rather than the large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	For this reason we do not put back the intestines, unless it is hot, and we do not put them back from cold to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	for the intestines swell sometimes so that they feel the cold, so let us put them back more often;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because this causes the internal wound, because it keeps the intestines in their place while others...18.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to three ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common stitches in the abdominal stitch have...
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitches of other wounds on the chest and other common private stitches are common to...
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all the ways they are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and good thing is of the remedy, this is by one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For where the intestines are swollen because of the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or .i. damp rag barely wet with cold water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you cook in cold milk and garlic and spice,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine as long as the swelling is open;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never stops doing this restraining, and becomes soft that it is empty for deflating.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling disappear, if you moisten the intestine with water or salt and cook it well,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this it is stiffened at little of something;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument that is used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to let it bleed.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we do not chop off unless there is great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If you cut yourself in a corbeau, don't run away, and look at the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have broken out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it according to the natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you can do so, for this is a difficult thing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and is in the part of the loins below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if you make the patient lie on their back.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and is in the part of the loins below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if the head and breast are higher than the shoulder parts
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if a rupture from the belly is in the lower of the .ij. parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you find that the part that is torn is higher than the other part;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus one should treat what I say here for great and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Here is a translation of the text line by line:
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and then place your hand over it. Let the minister with the knife come to your aid who will pierce all the wound from side to side with his knife,
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of sewing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and is that you squeeze a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave from the head of the wound 1/4 inch, and thread a needle or there is 1/2 inch good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the 1/4 inches of skin with the 1/2 inch of thread,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who is desoz the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and put together the .ij. chief with the .iiij. together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	and pull out a double thread through the needle from both sides,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and then put together the  .ij. heads of the wound in front of,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave  1.2 inches of space between, and then put another needle,
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	and then cut the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is closed up;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and the needles are small and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	For the fine needles pierce all the ship, and the too large ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for so it comes that they are little.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and does not come to put the needles too far from the side of the ship and the hide.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they pierce and open the wound in front of the stitch
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut off the heads of the needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or drapes on the heads of the needles to keep them from moving,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing the needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for he had suffered a needle or .ij.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and is that you join together the .ij. stitches of the leather and the .ij. stitches of the medicine with a sharp needle or he has a .i. strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these stitches all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If I return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that one sews thread.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller thread;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is made by the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sew an opening that has been made or a wound,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and there were well over two palm's width of intestines,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was on his abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I took out the intestine then it had been  .xxiiij. hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and was sewed up just after .xv. days, and I treated it, and was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the miracle was that the mirror had been broken, and yet he lived.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where one cannot find it, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put on more cotton wool 11 times a day, and wash with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the 11 proper ways to stitch:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and thread it from the outside of the wound inward.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has pierced the skin on the right side, if you have sewn or stitched where you pierced with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and pierce it from another side from within to where it is far.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and understand this stitch that you also sew like the skin-peeler does with the fur,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the medicine on one side and reapply it on the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of stitching, which Galen explains properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is like any other fountain, which unites the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the main drugs to another in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	file an awl or tip of mirach near, and pierce that one only,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two parts of the syrup;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part all the way to the inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as a doctor.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce the other one from outside part all the way to inside, in two more chiés with needle that are on other side of the body;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the method of suturing and it is most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galens says so of this word, and no one testifies against it.
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One should sew the belly with .ij. needles or thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one should put the needle from one side and the other, in the manner of those who sew with corroded needles.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the tear is in the middle of the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If the stitch is more painful than other stitches from the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound if they are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If the intestine is pushed back and the cut is made, then put the powder on and cover it up,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if it moves again, place it on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the cord, and let the sutures and mirrors be;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as you would any other, until it is well.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, place cotton wool on it, as soon as it begins to come off,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and shake it .ij. times a day as long as it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if you wet another light member in hot oil, or in rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and set the arms, and stretch out the legs;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	If he feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and often happens
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the black wine enemas are used, and sometimes putridity comes up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces it, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestinal tract called "jejunum" cannot heal once it has been torn.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	is due to the presence of veins and the subtlety of the entire body, as well as the nearness of its essence to that of the young.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound heals quickly, then it is like the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it becomes dark and putrid, so that you can see the black spot that causes it to rot, then
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and then cut who is between the line,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two shoulders hanging from the part of the wound until far away so as to facilitate the extraction when the zephyr blows, and the wound swells.
de la routure dou boueil	from the cut on the brow
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	For I have seen some honor that a noble man or a warrior's belly was pierced by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen;
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became a fistula, and there was an emission and wind.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I used the information I had to treat him, and did not stop applying the poultice until he was well, and bound up the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient had done him harm in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no illness, but he recovered in good health, and eating and drinking well;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and said no experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take the skin from a large testicle, and then gather the lips of the wound together,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the skin has opened the mouth, so it is placed on the .iij. lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it stretches her mouth out;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts off the head, and this stays there so it cannot come loose,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then you put another one in that same way as before, until the wound is completely healed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound;
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This passage seems to be describing a surgical technique for treating intestinal wounds without causing any harm to the patient. The text is in Old French and dates back to the 12th-13th centuries.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this thread of intestine that is not yet shredded,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie at the head of this thread. i. a very fine linen thread, twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then dip the thread in the needle, and cut the intestine, and pull it through the slit.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing frets is valid only as long as the vein and the hope remain;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no more cure than surgery.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	for fistula or wherever it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	That all wounds or abscesses, when they heal, are called universally "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most often when it is cut and the blood runs.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the theory of vital force, hard and white, so that one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also chewed like the feathers of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and not once in a clear sky, and another time in thick fog;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	ne either time, and another time enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is only by one of these seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This is the translation of the provided Old French text:
ou por sa malice;	or, because of its malice.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or, because it has hard teeth and lips, so that it does not let them grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or, where there is too much bowels.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	If the legs are swollen, and the material is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because corruption is a way to cause disease;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already described all these causes, and the signs, and remedies of medicines in the dissection.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I should inform you of the cure for fistula, which is made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	For there are fistulae which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the belly, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the back bone, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it is necessary to cut at the root of the member and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas which are of this kind are of great difficulty in healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula that does not come up to the level that I have said, and you have begun to heal it,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see it clearly, take a piece of leather or iron, if the fistula is straight, try it out.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, try it out with a thin piece of leather.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	For the plons are wetted by the rain in the tortuosity.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if they pricked with a sharp needle and you cannot see it well by the tent,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if the cautery is applied to one of the punctures,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For if the moisture comes from one puncture to another, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	and then you will have bleeding under control, that you know if there are any bones or nerves, and it is shaved completely,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know for sure the place, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in some cases that I have told you, if the cup is according to what I said,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and there are bones broken and rusted wheels that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the cure until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and its fistula is very deep from the right side, so that you cut it perfectly, as well as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then dip them wet in medicinal vinegar, and pour them up to the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	as long as the medicine corrodes the excess that is held up at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put oil-of-olives on holy chalk, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not made well with this, then burn with fire, as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the nose is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein is injured or a limb is broken, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, let the king wait until the corruption is completely bone;
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal of things that trouble him as long as he is well;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not well, and reset it in the same way as before;
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	since you have not yet gone down to the well,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all corruption, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that corruption is complete, so you cannot come.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other device than to weaken by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone that has rotted, and you can pull it with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with an appropriate instrument for this purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if he has one arm, if he can't walk, don't leave any of them.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	if moisture makes him clumsy, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if he has pain and moisture and heat, and delivers the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you don't remove them in an hour, put something that causes putrefaction on the wound,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it so long that the legs are inside the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then the bones will come together more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you only reset the corruption as long as the blackness is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	and then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is much decay of the bone, and it comes up to the root of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it covers all the way to the root of the bone, and then heals it until it is solid;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may obtain an example and aid for your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	A young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from an cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As the matter came to the leg, and was driven out by a large abscess, and had no apparent cause for opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	However, because of his madness, he opened so much that the abscess opened;
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and when they corrode the matter, and become a fistula, and I came out of the breach that all go up bow and moisture from the chest;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and much mirth did I find cure in.1 . years, and there was no profit for me in the art of surgery,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	for as long as I have been called, and saw his leg, and the medicines with which he was cured,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which corrots through the breaches into the chest;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his body became red with youthfulness, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I lit a tent in one of those passages, and then searched all the passages,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one came out against the other on both sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and entered into one of the passages as far as I could see a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and putrid, and the putridness went as far as the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew who showed me the rotten bone, and I made sure that there was no other corruption, except for the one that I had;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with sodden medicines over a long period of time, and I could not seal it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the sawdust, and then I sawed the bone, and leaned to weld the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not stop the blood flowing from a palm of the bone, and I carried it all the way down.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I treated it with medicine; and he was healed and welded firmly together.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it was no longer necessary to warn against the danger of disease, which cannot stand,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For in the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and he bore the name of an oss in place of his bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary in all things, nor did he have any ill will or desire to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if his bone is broken in any part of the chest, then it should be done in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a long thread, and tie it to the top of the bone that has been opened.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct that he extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and tie another thicker thread to the second thread, and tie this higher up on the wire that is lying over the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch out the head, so you pull down the broken piece,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the cloth on the bed where you see silk, so that the silk does not stain the cloth.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put .i. log or a table under the body so as not to corrode the bed.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary so long as one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If you discover a char all; then put .i. a piece of ash
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then string one part to the other the corrosion, and is the stringing from the long of the corrosion .i. piece, if as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the joint corrupted, and string the bone or it contains of the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the extension of the iij. joints, so there is not another ankle that from the copers;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if it is corrupted by being poked in the hand or in the foot, for that is very painful.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but you must certainly inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hurt you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and the shape of the teeth;
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their grossness and fineness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this it is appropriate that each instrument be prepared according to the appearance of the wound;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and knows that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the symptoms of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you have a tool, think about what is necessary for it to work as intended.
dou feu	double fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head should be positioned either forward or backward,
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have the corrosive medicine to treat the disease, and it does not benefit,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	If it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corrosion comes,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes from death or from evil, which is greater, through the failure of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the members become black, and that they seem to be burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then corruption of the member comes after darkness, and it continues from member to member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and cover with all the body; if you hurry too much,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the impact of certain poisonous creatures, such as
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the top of the two, if the head, and give him no space to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes only to the hand, if the head is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come only to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, so the scythe to the sword; and if it passes the sword, then is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and I know not any remedy that may be used save only the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so much is to be done as soon as the corrosion begins or it comes out: if it comes to the first joint, then the scythe goes beyond the next joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes out or it comes, then the scythe takes all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends up the leg, so it copes to the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other thing but that the patient dies in pain;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cope or sew the limb so that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister of the two lines downstream, and another minister of the other line upstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you release the hook that is between the 17th and 22nd ribs to the 1st spermatile [testicle], as long as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the bandage or silk, and put a lin fabric on each side 1st sheet, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and brings another wound and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if they pricked at their base, cauterize the place well.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	ou you place upon some powders restraining; then return to your medication as long as it is completed,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lay the member naked of a linen bandage, and treat it as long as it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man in some place:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a blackness that seemed like fire burned him,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first to his two toes, as long as she hurt all the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the honor saw the corrosion, if he was burned with copper on the foot, and he was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and a long time later the corrosion came to his two hands, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put on him things that rub against after cleansing the skin, and I cannot stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said to me that I should let him cut off my hand, and I did not want, for I had hope of restoring the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I let him cut off his hand, he would not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtue of the man was weak; and he became desperate and returned to his own land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he cut off his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no other account but for what one does otherwise, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Now comes the apostem in dry meat, and delays so much that it makes great assembly of bowels;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then rot and perforate, and spring the bowels, and remain the vises, as our vassals do;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the leather that is above is also thin like .I. draperies loosed,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not cut into bone, nor into the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in perfect fashion, then it is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cautery should be that you cut all the way around, and even more so when it is thin, just like a flag.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not burn because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have promised that the leather will burn, and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the leather is hard like a shield, if the hot water cure is performed thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if her breasts are big, and the bow which she wears is of an offensive smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	So here is the translation of that sentence:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ash, oil, and litharge, evenly, and put them to cook in a .i. vase on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and also thick like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and bind up the chest, and pinch the navel.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for 1 . 2 hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this seven times, until the breast is red and swollen, and the bone is exposed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and once more with water from ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour it out, and make a paste, until you are certain that the breasts are well covered;"
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes of the vine;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	then make a paste of water and honey with a little bit of lime;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound bitter.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have vowed that the breasts are well-mounded,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	so that the fire cautery of what gives birth to character in him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and is that you press plaster finely, and the font with oil of roses and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you dip it in some medications and herbs, which I have spoken about the properties of herbs for treating;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the nose is small, and the hole of the cautery cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if the ear is large, and put a tent of Egyptian oil in it;
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so that the sweat and i leave so much space that the poultice could enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the break is higher than the top, so that the cap or lower it more than i is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the break is perfect, so that it does not leave char;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the loins of a woman as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	how she should appear in such a way that her belly button is at the lowest possible level.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the navel is perfect, it should not be hidden.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the loins of a woman as you see fit,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medicines that consolidate it on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are on a linen drape that covers the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then put pressure on the breast from the top; and place a cloth over the breast that is larger at the top,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and let it be placed on the abscess with wool, to keep the bow in place, and do not remove the large bandage except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and those who are over the abscess in the chest, often remove to remove the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what runs from the bow, if it is poison or pock or enough, or digest, or indigest;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and check if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when this medicine has spread out in a certain way and you see the nature that rises from the navel to the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts are already developing, and bring the saint near;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then put it in the morning, or in the third day, and when you clean the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if they change.i. another fabric, and renew the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become hard after many days, knowing that the breasts do not hurt.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle venom comes slowly after a long time, if it does not dispel you from health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health approaches gradually. For there are men whose pain in their wounds increases and who cause the opposite to happen;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if it is indignant, it jumps out of the sea after many days, knowing that the sea does not move.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if his breast is tardy to heal, and is enlarged, then put medicine between moist in substance and dry in virtue.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	so that it may be cured completely, for there is a great deal of vitriol, and this is the back medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the end of vitriol, and make it with oil of rose, and dilute it with equal substance of red wine;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then add honey to it and increase its size.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when the ointment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it comes out of the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply it to the wound, and never use it as a drink or as an ingredient in a meal,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the herb called garlic, which is also like flour of beans and centory.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simple herbs or compounds: grind them, and make a powder thereof, and put thereon the honey which I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you know that corruption is complete, and it affects the bones or hard members, or the limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the healer of the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toenail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is a toenail that grows out from the base of the nail on the palm of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or in other cases it may come out from under another nail;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is sent, and no care is taken, so that there comes .i. abscesses,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and get down as far as they can cut the root of the nail, and by chance cut it all.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corrosion comes up to the bone, so that there is a pungent pain, and the two legs are wide apart, and the color is blue.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary that you cut off all the excess that has been preserved from the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail starts to curl, and blisters,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If you need to put the ring on the nail that points down,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the bottle upside down, and gently and lightly wrap this thin skin.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remains of the skin medicinals burning and corrosive in order to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure with onions as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it chips off, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see that the corruption has spread, chip it off as described above,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken, and hurts, and smells bad, then you must heal it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the nail of the little finger with a chisel from the side,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cutting does not go to the knuckle, because the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if that happens, put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the sore on the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two of you must stretch out those who are born with a large amount of flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is bone there, and never an ankle.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of the two are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in neither of us two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born in neither of the two don't move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who are born with a double joint, by chance do not move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of that which is chubby so is light, in some way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the size of that which is chubby so is light, in some way:
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief à curer: si te tien dou coper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In the one who is born or must to the tail not, if it seems necessary that you chop first the meat roundly up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then chop the bone with a suitable saw for this, and then heal as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The two ways in which it comes together by nature, by joining of wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you chop this joint together, if it is joined according to its natural form;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or drapes dipped in oil so it doesn't stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two thin pieces of cloth until the joins are stuck together as is right.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The two pieces should be pressed together with the palm of one hand so that it sticks properly as is right.
Des vils	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large wrapped full of melancholy superfluities, which come from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more comes in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you give no spurious purging of the colon, and then heal the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure of iron is according to these two ways: one is to drink it mixed, and the other is to run black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you hold the vein, and tie it all up tightly.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size should be according to this method: raise the first leg of the patient very strong with hot water, until the large vein is clearly visible.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the ankle;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein in one place, or in two places, or in three places, of a width that is wide;
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	and then take out with force the black blood from your hand, from one side to the other, as much as the virtue of the disease allows you to suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then burn it, and command that he turns his meat black with coal;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and then restart the evacuation and sweating when the veins are clean, and give the medicine to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The method of applying the remedy is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then put it in a bath, and raise his leg with hot water until it turns red, and swollen veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you don't have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then put it on the affected area from the ankle to the knee, or in the part below the ankle at the foot;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then soak the skin with vinegar, and scrape the vein from each side until it feels smooth when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and if it turns red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems as white as a rope;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	and bottle up the roast as long as it is lean meat, and then dip it in a light wine,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cover with another 1/4 of an ounce; then peel the skin from the vein as long as it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then dip in roast at an angle as you did, and dip in another ounce, as you did first time;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cover with another size, or more if you need it, then peel the meat, and cover with two ounces of wine on the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	and then cut the tail and leave it at the second size; then take it out size by size until it is all finished, then cover it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then tie a strong double thread of thread to it.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and leave it and cut it, and twist it with the thumb, and turn your hand from side to side, until it is all finished;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from unraveling, for if it unravels, then you cannot draw it out or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished treating it, put a wet wool cloth, soaked in wine and oil, on the wound's place; and let the cure go on until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vision is twisted and contorted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	if you split it badly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron that you cover the vision with if it is curved, and do not cut it, so that it covers the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large circumference, because if it were thin, it would split the vein, but being thick as we said, and this is the form:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in legs, warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it grows in other parts besides the legs, and this causes a peeling that comes from the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	If he comes from within the body snake-like and downward, protect between skin and leather.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this injury are that it comes in the leg a very great swelling,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then change their faces, and begins the injury to come out, also like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head opens, if you wrap a piece of linen around one third and a half up to two thirds, and tie it on,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the ball hanging at the leg, and every time that it is there to the side, if the wrapper wraps around the ball and the new;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too far away, so that a part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it all the way up to its root, as long as it is all out;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cover it, so that it enters into the charnel, and brings about abscession and rot where it is, and bad sickness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because for this thing it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the head, and there remains nothing or bones;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and this vein is never done when it comes to .v. palms long, or .x.,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and here are some fine people who have come to me, of whom she is of .x. long palms, and when you chop them, if they are short or large, and pierce until it is deep,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything is removed; and let the matter which is within be empty, and introduce into it remedies for any kind of corruption each day, then heal it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never do this vein with hands wet, and certainly not when she opens at the joint of the foot, or where the foot is.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and the wind comes from the east, and from which it rains; treat it then as we have said above.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between skin and cloth
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease", because it often affects buffaloes,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between skin and cloth, and it goes everywhere, ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and the pain is very great from one limb to another, until it tears the skin where it goes, and makes a loud sound.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is infected with pus, as if it comes from within, winding itself in and out, and sending forth worms and scabies or parasites.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and there is doubt of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the neck:
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	and in due course enters and destroys the throat; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you cure and extract it, if it can only be done when he is:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So that you can put the joint in place again with a strong rope, tightly wound,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	and then turn it over and over, and if it does not fit perfectly into the frame,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so that the fire cautery on it as long as it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm he causes, if he ruins oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see him coming with his head near the oil, then remove his eye completely, then cut it off and throw it away;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and use the patient of purification of water of medicine solutions for bad humors to come out;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if meat is rotten.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vacir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it spreads from one member to another; and I saw the one I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and .i. shortly thereafter, the eye rises up like a snake to the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	as soon as possible, also as if it were alive silver when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departs from that place and enters into the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it runs through all the body, until it came out in the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	And he told me that it twists around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how much it moved from limb to limb, for I have never seen this disease move like that before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I know of many who have had pain in one place and then in another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I have never seen it happen like that, as I saw it happen to the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it was for this reason that the woman had a dry breast, and the veins uncovered.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason does she seem to be constipated?
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear to be constipated according to this reasoning, but these who are delicious, and have dry breasts and veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels pain as we have described,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the lion lies down and does not get up again, and then it copes with him as long as that wind forces him to lie down.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the lion; and if you do not see his eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	For the cure of this person who causes wind, as if they were pills of putrid meat, and pills of seraphim, and similar things.
Des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and others small, and some curved, and some soldered.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some with .ij. angles, and some with tongues, and some where there are pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and some that strike in any member so strike according to .ij. ways: or in a principal member chews,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Here is the translation of the first sentence in your text:
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When there is a loss of sensation in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, then you know:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If you wash yourself with water from a spring, for death comes after many preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when there is no sign of death, and the arrow has not been completely extracted, if you tie it and clean the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when scotomy and pain and stiffness and redness in the joints, and inflammation and redness in the tongue, and spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes it comes from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and sometimes there is a wet white spot on the wound, resembling pus, and sometimes it looks like burnt flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, if you hold it for a cure, and treat the arrow if it is not in place.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it falls or curls is that it is near the left breast and also feels like it is wedged into something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and if the arrow changes as well as a bird, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and faints:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	says ahead of time that death might come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow is that it does not feel pain in the palm, but when it jumps out of the wound there is foam, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily and shudders with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters into the shoulder blade's cover, it severs the little ribs; and causes great pain and sorrow and heavy breathing; and all the limbs shake.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters into the stomach, perhaps there is foam jumping out of the wound, indicating that it has gone astray and not struck the target.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters into the abdomen, and in jumping out of the wound there is no end to the intestines, then there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, and the urine flows out in spurts and he runs away, and the patient feels great pain, you know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, as it is the case with the face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and forelegs and legs, and similar body parts, are safe according to several arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow enters the neck or artery, and it is not fatal, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you do something else.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	He had an arrow choked or cut in the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and the other side sewed up the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I sewed up a piece of meat that had gotten into the fat of the oil, separating the paper from it.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was withdrawn, and I could only get to the tip towards the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was blue-green in color, very light in weight without ears; the game was healed, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And cut an arrow from the throat of a Christian man, and the arrow was Arabic to the ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I knew the armpits, and I tested it until I cut it, and the Christian man was cured.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And cut an arrow at the hip, which went through his belly or chest, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then he lived for three hundred years, but his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut the arrow, and set it in place, and drew it back, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to see a man who has an arrow shot through his buttocks or anus, and the wound is well healed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and let the arrow remain inside, and do not change its natural state;
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	do not find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I see another man, to whom he shot an arrow into his face, and it was sewed up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and it remained thus without suffering much pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And shot an arrow at a prince's son, the king, which went through his neck, but missed his heart.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly倾斜着向右边；而且箭头完全扎进去了。
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat after she had been ill for two days. The wound was very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I asked her to open her mouth wide, and I did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt pain and discomfort on the right side of her ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of an arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the plaster of troy to the chest for this reason so that the lungs do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I discovered the lungs from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster every day, and quickly resolve the wound, and delay it for a long time for the patient,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he feels the arrow; and I tell him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a caustic medicine by hands, as long as it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried, and felt the head of the arrow which moved to its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I put on the wound by that caustic medicine, as long as the head of the arrow was clearly visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and I traversed well the terms for three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then unwrapped it with a wound I had tied up with thorns, and the flesh on either side, and it couldn't be pulled out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I stopped using sharp tools and devising methods to remove it until I got a good pair of pliers.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its shape will be after the end of this chapter, as long as I kept it in my hand and returned the wound to its place.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge said that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I healed it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Tell me about the quality of extracting certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you apply my remedy to those I do not mention here, for the book cannot include everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But the master sages compare only a few things, and those that are present and failing;
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	trueve nueve oevre, et nuef instrument, au dessendement des choses extrangies qui avienent en cet art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows should not come from the members where they are inserted except according to the following four ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which goes in by one way, when it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and does not go in again at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, if it leaves it as the fur is rotten inside, and let the issue come out.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, if you leave it like this for some days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if there is a small hole inside everywhere, as long as the inside space is widened, and then the treatment is applied;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes through one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said to avoid in the patient: if you do not draw it out, but leave it as long as it is even for a few days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes only to the flesh, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	and if the arrow does not go deeper than the bone, and only comes to the flesh, that is death.
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient will last for some days without any other bad accident, if the mechanism of drawing it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck so that it cannot come out, then administer tar and resin, as I have told you; then heal the joint as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is re-embedded in the body so that it cannot be seen, and you seek it throughout the whole body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you can feel it, and with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by the pressure of the wound, and for the sake of the arrow's depth;
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein, if the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the shaft is lodged in the muscle at a depth of .ij. parts from the tip that you can feel,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully though you do not break the arrow, that you draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot take it out at once, so that the end of the arrow is stuck in his flesh, then draw it out, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain of extraction makes you uncomfortable, then apply what we have said about the cure in our chapter on the paste;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and do not attempt to draw out the arrow without risk;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If it is hot or cold, or firmly or painfully; and put the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow went in,
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	For an arrow that comes from another part, or does not open anything of it, or the skin is swollen in a particular place, if we see it or feel it:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Therefore cut along, as long as the scrapes can take it, and then remove it: but now jump back.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be removed, let it rest, and then begin the extraction again as long as it can be;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a arrow in it, blow it out completely;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if there is a knot, and you know how to cut it, so you administer the instrument well;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	So that the arrowhead goes into the hole of the instrument; and then pour out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is cut, so that the instrument with a point entering it, for to rejoice the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, so that you cut all the charm around where the venom is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it covers, if it is possible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow pierces where the pelvis or bladder or ribcage is, and it is close by, then you can cover over it, if you cover.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and don't cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, that is a job.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an eye, and this is how you should do it:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the pointed hair is also like the feathers of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	For binding the point of an arrow, so that it resembles the feather of a bird, thus is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for bending and for holding, so that it can be shaped like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common heart
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one heals are xxxiii, so that there is a head xvi.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is to know: i.i. bones that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbeche".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the ii.i. arteries that are in ii.i. temples apparent;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and .ij. veins that are in .ij. nails of .ij. hairs, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the 2. veins that are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the 2. veins that are on top of the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augerich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and there are veins that are torn.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly known as  are found in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it runs along the left side of the body, and it is called by the common people "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the other is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "vein of comfort"; and if the base is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "vein of the navel", and it is over the heart.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and that is which is opened in front of the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the small vein is the one that is between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has three rains.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the foot are .iij. veins: one is desoz the corbeure doupochet de senestre costit
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second one, which is at the ankle of the right coast; and the vein that is called «nesse», which is in the ankle of the other coast;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are .iij. veins desoz those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	and the vein that is called  «sainie», which is behind the ears, and it has a headache and migrain.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the patient, as I told you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are with a sharp cloth; then tie up the patient's neck with a strap,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears in .iij. places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then feel for the pulse on both sides, and where you feel the pulse pulsating on one side, sign;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	and take the lance, and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein upstream,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut off and tie up the flesh and the vein well .ij. two must travel, and let out blood as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then extract and bind it together, as long as it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already mentioned incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause migraine headaches,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and eye pain, and a sore throat, and water coming from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the vessel if it is like this:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	is that the patient's neck is stretched out so that the two veins open up widely.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and send the hair above the nose to grow long, and then sign with the hand.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then place the curette on the vein at the top of your index finger, and dip the lance into water,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and place the vein at the top, and cut it, like you did in .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then remove the curette, and place your index finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then let it form, and leave it until it is healthy; and we have spoken of them and their cutting and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the front vein is as good as the health of the cerebral veins from the ancient diseases of the face, and has headaches and dizziness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and hold firmly with your hand, or some other object, and let the blood flow in the amount that you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then cut off the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame might break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The five veins that are in the five limbs should be tied together, and at the base of the neck, and to the taste, and to the redness, and to the oil, and to the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is that the patient pulls his neck out by twisting it from any rope, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	and then the health, and be the health of the traveler, a little of the long flame a little wide, because there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, in case of a breeze; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it to the cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The health of the vein of the new born baby should be measured, and if it is too big or too small, and if there are any diseases on the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	if as headache and brightness that comes to the face, and even when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the disease is that the patient twists his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a long thin flame, and burn between the iij. nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well on its own, and now the blood will begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not overheat it too much, and make it run a bit of blood according to your need, then leave it a night, for it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	is the form of the fire:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The five givens in the form of fire: aid in the stranglehold of the larynx, and in the obstruction of speech, and many diseases, and impetigo, and ulcers, and herpes, and are to be used.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the fire so that the disease is removed from the neck on both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master stand over the patient's head, and the patient cuts with .i. a scythe,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then he heals the vein of the long one widely then soon of blood, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then he repairs the other in the same way, then he draws out the ligaments carefully, and holds them so that they do not move;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	let the patient rest; and in the morning the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	On the health of deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	On the health of lips: to prevent chaps from forming on the corners of the mouth, and from corroding the gums, and from splits in the lips, and from nosebleeds and headaches.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of this remedy are to make the patient sit in front of you, and to hold his throat as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two openings, which are on the right and left lips.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and the eyes look like they are black, and because of the small veins around them that are black:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	so cope both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	so cope the largest of each pair, and do the same for the .ij. veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the small ones on top
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	For the blood vessels that are opened with the tongue after opening the cerebral vein, and this is in the extraction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the surgeon is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and the tongue turns blue, and looks down at each side a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So then both sides, and do not over-surge, for the veins are there.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck which are commonly operated on are operated on according to .ij. manners:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and the stretching of veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is like this, and it is wide as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And has the skill to open the flat veins that are visible with great blood flow, and that contain large blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and it is for saving subtle veins, or there is subtle blood yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The salve of the basilica, which is one of these veins, soothes diseases that are found in the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the healer to heal thoroughly, and to warm himself with the artery that is found.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts into the artery, and blood flow comes, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be held by fire but cut off as much as possible.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary to remove it and change it with another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you do not want any rain of his, or you heal in the place of his the vein by cutting off the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the coat to the flame ansile, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	and if you know the place of the injury, so that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as soon as you know the hair;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the head, and then draw the arm, and coat the vein with the flame ansile;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and guard against injuring in the artery when you see the head dislocated, for it is from the artery: beware of it. So as not to.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see coming out on top as urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	So hurry up, and place your hand on top for a long time, then remove your hand so that it does not hurt, because this often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	So raise the limb up and leave it there, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the limb is not stable, and it comes to you, and the medicine is not given to you, then open the artery, for the head of the shoulder is dislocated; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a strip of fig bark, cut it, and take one half and tie it firmly together up to the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If there is no bleeding, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops bleeding; as we have said,
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the bleeding does not become greater in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The treatment for a vein in the middle is to place the finger with the wound at the base of the neck, and around the heart.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it comes to the surgeon that he should cut down on the nerve which is exposed, and if he cuts too much in perfection, and then it bleeds;
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells up and the patient becomes gray, and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and the nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then you must cut it with an anesthetic; and avoid cutting the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two thirds, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment of a headache with the help of fire, that it pulls away from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is appropriate to hit with fire from the olive or from the merlin flame, because it is the most effective for all veins, since it does not damage the nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest fire first, and do no harm the first time, and start over again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and in case it increases the length of some men's penises for the first time but does not harm them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your belief.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about a doctor is that medicine should only be practiced to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent diseases from arising;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the surgeon make it in one of the three veins that are in the head: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basal.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the surgeon must make it at the beginning of fasting, and in autumn and winter after supper when the sign of fullness appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and the surgeon must make it on the first day or the third day, after two hours or three days a day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The surgeon who is amined for certain diseases has no fixed term, but it must be done at the beginning of the day or night in all hours and times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one should not save children until they are 12 years old, nor a woman unless she has been pregnant for four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One should not save the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And if one is to be saved in any way, it is necessary that the intestines of a light clister be destroyed.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if it has suffered from a foul wind, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous dung that is harmful to the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	car il y a plusors mores qui sont souvens, comme la colique et le vomissement, et le decorrement de ventre, et la multiplicatie d’abiter a femme, et le traval, et veiller et juner;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and to keep the flesh of the foot dry from the wound at the third toe, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and to protect yourself from work, hunger, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be lying down and jointed, and may the surgeon be above you, and rub your arms. 12 times or 13,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then remove the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or constricted, it cannot run without being removed.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the wound with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then soak the wound with a little old oil, then put your index of your left hand on that wound to rub it where you want to heal,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	to make sure that the vein is not cut and does not bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run like strings to the skin, and if any such are damaged, they will bleed profusely.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if one puts out the flame, then removes it, and cannot open the vein, then is he among those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, so that he may be warned of the need for care in such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if it begins again a little later on that same side or during treatment, if the legs are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the legs are swollen, and the patient hopes to recover, let him lie for a day or two, and do not bind his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	For adventure I will come out of the chest; no bath, then start the cure if it pleases her.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the break is small, or the blood runs subtlely and you doubt that it will not run as much as you see, so confident in this very break, right up to the full flame;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work a little hospital, so that her legs are swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the leg swollen, do not restart the cure, and put a little oil thereon, for it softens the body of the blood, and is fresh in this leg where the oil is placed, because she smoothes the course of the blood, and is moistened by this oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and administer oil to each vein you cut, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same mixture makes three times as strong and hard when placed on top; but if it is too thick, it disperses so easily.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there is one large abscess, which often occurs when the opening of the vein is small, then
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hurry, and place a wet sponge in water and salt on top, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green, then it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on nothing of aloe or myrrh in the juice of calamus, vinegar, or resembling.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and a bad appearance in the place of the bazooka: put your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the appearance of the bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So avoid putting on anything of what we have said, because perhaps in the court without the artery; but make it.I. dry by applying plaster to harden the place, then heal it with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And each of the three must be used according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it run until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it run until it is thin; and if it is too thick, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are pale and have a need to extract blood, one should make the wound larger and wider, and make the flames wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is good to bleed them little and often, and one should bleed them across rather than straight; not by piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of treatment saves from decay of the flesh and destruction of the nerves, and it is better than long or wide surgery.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those whose bodies require surgery, it is good to give water in grape juice; if it is heated, it will cool the body three or four times or seven or eight times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, if he moistens before the surgery with water in muslined juice, or in honey syrup infused with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he sweats during the surgery, after the exit of the blood from the vein, it is good that he inhales broth and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and employ other things that we have spoken of in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If it vomits up arms, and sometimes also, if it is weak enough, that it heals little by little, according to the quantity of its continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it vomits up arms after the first healing, and has a strong pulse, then heal it after .viij. hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if it heals on another part, it must heal three times a day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it brings on a fever. If this quantity is drawn in great amount, and the opening enlarged until it comes out in small drops;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	And that you keep all of the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse as it heals, so that death does not come out in small drops;
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And if this often happens when the healing is neglected;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not come until you see the arm move again, and make a second incision, and close the opening, that you press firmly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is hoarse, let him stretch his arms weitly, for it would be ill.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him rest until he is well the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen at the edge of the vein thaws out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on .i. piece of silk wet with water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has been pricked, do not hold it, but let it rest until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, then the vein in the middle, or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The arm is veined where it connects to the shoulder; therefore, draw blood from there if it is composed of veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to prepare the vein is that the patient dips his hand in warm water until the pulse becomes faint;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then stretch the skin gently so that the vein appears clearly; then cut it now, not wide nor long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the split be wide, and let the wound be well near the joint of the hand, and so it cannot come out, put the hand in warm water, and let the blood run into the water as long as you have enough of it;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is heated up, then do not re-boot the hand in warm water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the wound from this vein is safer from all other wounds, that there is no artery or nerve;
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	the saving of the right hand wound from all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cross-slice it all, do not hurt anything."
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not cut too deeply, lest the nerve be damaged, for they are all naked under the skin."
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand back in hot water, which freezes it into the wound, and cannot be taken out."
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated blood as much as is necessary, if you put oil and thread so that the vein is tightly bound together, and do this for each limb.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood of him in the left hand belongs to the disease of the mouse, and do all the same as I told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The blood of the woman belongs to all the diseases that are caused by the horse,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the mare, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rain, and of the cocks and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is such that the patient drinks some hot water, and rubs the vein as long as it hurts.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and on top of the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and up to the foot in many places;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So that it goes deeper or wider, or at the ankle, so that it must be cut more deeply.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it on the foot, so that the wound is deep and wide, and cut it as one would in a field; and let the flames burn.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot come out of it, put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it bleeds too much the first time, start the second time a little higher up because the blood is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerve, if it bleeds too much, as we have said, and so do the same thing with the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The blood of the vein is at the ankle, and its sap is worth the pain of the thigh, when it comes to pain.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of his leg is that the patient goes or bathes, and removes from above the ankle .iiij. two in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise does not open the vein; and if it opens, so that you can heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth more than you can cut it, for the leech is above, and it is very repleted with moisture to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not heal it, so that the leech is above or below the foot, and toward the small ear, and guard against the water;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and do so much blood that you see, and then untie the link, and put on cotton and hold it in place; now he is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Vacuums of suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or glass, or marble; and the suction is applied according to 3.1 ways: either by hurting and pulling out blood, or without hurting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this type of suction that is without hurting is according to 3.1 ways: either it is all fire, or it is not fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation which is made by piercing and by extraction of blood so is made in 123. days from the heart,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	for one is all in some the head; and others is half the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and 1 other on 1 coast of the neck; and the windpipe separates the mouth;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the windpipe separates the shoulders; and the windpipe under the chin;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the suction cups extract the .ij. arms; and the suction cups of the .ij. legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction cups of the .ij. ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except that of small veins that are scattered over the cart,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason do not feel faint, as one feels when opening a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it does not need to be eaten, nor does it need to be drunk, in any disease that comes from overindulgence, until the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if because of necessity due to disease or by custom, we administer it every hour during the month, or at its end and in between;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to vomit, become very ill;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who have vomiting and redness on their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and if there are those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and they are parched with thirst;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are some who think and see blood and vomit and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed when it is half past noon, we order them to exhale after.iij. hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The physician of the mother should not help in the birth of the child ... that comes to the hairs, and it is not until after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation is in place for the physician of the head,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not good for those who are of cold complexions to use it or who have had a fever, because this does them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and so it is not good for those who are old to use it, or who have had any cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured of it often become confused, and therefore the cautery should be placed a little further back due to the confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The placement of the cautery at the base of the neck is good for diseases of the throat and tonsils, and also for treatment of the mouth.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and from the splitting of the channel of the pommel, and all the rest, and repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to put it in with force, for if it holds too firmly, then there will be difficulty or obstruction or stomach or elsewhere.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventsations are like .ij. ribs of the neck if it hurts as much as the pain in the head, and blinding and throbbing, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is in the place of the health of the church; and it is necessary that you command to the saint that he express his hand to put on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not bring damage from blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings of the mouth are very much affected by disease of the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and other diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place where the lower lip meets the upper.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are affected by disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The windings of the sides affect as much as the three veins of the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command to the surgeon that he does not cut too much perfectly, for his veins are naked of flesh and know how to stop bleeding.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	and the suction cup that is on the back so vale as emoroydes from the foundation, and of disease suet, and it should be a great one, and be of leather, that has a good business of well sucking; and by chance, if it were subtle, then would it break; and make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs so open, for they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for ancient pains of the hips, and of the knee, and of the bladder, and remove the flowers; and they are in the place of the two feet, and moreover they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about death in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and place it firmly, and stir evenly, and do not cease to do so, until you see the red and inflamed spot, and appear the pain of blood; then stop, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are some who have a dark color, and clear pores: so it is necessary to cut once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if he is out of breath, then he should strike 19 times: the first time to make a path for heavy blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if he is very heavy, then he should strike the third time; and when we want to squeeze out blood little by little, we should only press once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to squeeze out blood, we should do so frequently; and if he is heavy, we should strike firmly, and the blow should be such that the heart is pierced suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and cover those with thick and tough skin, who have been pricked by needles, that you rub the joints with oil that softens and dissolves.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	Here is the translation of the first sentence of the text in Old French into English:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	if it is in the liver, of oil of sorrel, or of larkspur, or of chamomile, or other similar matter.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	and if the surplus is thick and cold, then take oil of amber, or of balsam, or of aniseed, and similar matters.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	and if the meat is tender and large porridge, then it is not necessary to put oil in it:
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the windification of pink water, or cold water, or sloe water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other resembling.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has moisture, if it is lifted thus, or with pink water, and with water of myrtle, and with sumac, and with resembling things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And he who has great excesses, are lifted by old wine, or with water of hawthorn, or with a decotion of fennel or chamomile, or other resembling things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to take a bath before the windification, but after the bath an hour or so; and do not sleep after windification.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and he must not go to bed, when he should be winded, nor when he is winded.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against those who are ill-tempered, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he drinks cold things, as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce at the mint, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and warm wine, and ale of wheat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, if they drink syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and they juice little, and juice little and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will be wind-blown, if he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some people three times or more of an aromatic or musk before or after the wind, in order to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let it be subtle, but it is necessary that only those who are warm drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are not meant to hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the kidney, and on the podagra, and on the belly, and on the boudin, and on the reins, and on the hainche, for this member does not suffer pain from being cupped.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and one does it not more than to attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	if we put on the mammary glands when the child is stillborn; to remove the viscous substance that is in the member, if we put suction cups on the belly and on the boudin to reduce the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it relieves pain, when there is an operation or death, if by its attractive virtue the operation is relieved, or it moves away the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and so he will do if he puts it on the liver and on the heart when there is wind trapped,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are emptied clean so that only a little; and never are they emptied together fire, and never are they emptied with sweet water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way that he fills the suction cup with hot water or with water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And there are 21/4 inches of leather from the edge around the middle. A small hole as for an awl
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be of skin, smooth before it so that it does not cut the patient when put on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and in the middle is a staff of skin or iron to hold a candlestick,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the children's suction cups are different from the old ones, and leaner than the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must put this suction cup onto the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or .i. smoothly, and put it on the suction cup at the root of the penis which is on the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so it doesn't burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and your two hands are on the joint that we have said, so that when you see him, if there is steam, and take off the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the dressing off as before, and put it back on often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the case of the suction cup which is amine for pleurisy, there is no verge or hole, and it is only used when it is flat with water, and put on the limb as little as possible;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Sansues are not applied except to limbs where it is impossible to use suction cups due to their smallness, as with lips and gums, and similar things.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the naked legs of a horse, as with two or three year olds, and others similar;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of using them so that when you find Sansues that are in clear fresh water, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them into a bowl of clear fresh water, as long as they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then wash with water and vinegar, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clear, and are healing, then if it is possible to put a suction cup, then put it on, because that helps after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the limb, and then dip it in water, very well, and then squeeze it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb is too warm after washing the skin, then wrap it in a cold linen cloth, and put on, until the skin is dry;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if it has a multiplicity of holes, then put on it crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar things until it is stopped.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put half of peeled peas on the place, and leave them as they cook in the place, then now it will be stopped;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more work to do, then take other waters.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the waters do not want to take it, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you put an needle in it as long as the water comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, if they burn.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	When you see that they are crying, sprinkle a little powder of allium and marjoram, or ash, so they will not cry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	You must know, my son, that the wise men of old did not write of this medicine, nor have I ever read of it in any book.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the knowledge of this medicine is strange to us in our country, for I never found any good knowledge of it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing about it except from the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied and treated the science, and by experience, and by the customs of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and summarized it at the end, and clearly illustrated the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the preceding twenty chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting that we say in this book the sum of the words and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and it remains on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist or sprain comes to someone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing else stops him, so as not to be weak of heart, or feeble, or old;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if it is too tight or too loose; and if it is a cold weather, a cart drawn by oxen and covered with hides, and do not drink wine, nor eat any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the aphorism, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the disease returns to its first rule, which it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods that promote fatness, or they have viscosity, such as cooked flour in water, and rice, and beans, and peas, and poultry, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For if a person is too cold, it is better to prevent injury and do so more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones broken from age and decay cannot be well healed or strengthened according to their nature by the loss of members, nor those which are too tender, as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but there is no cure, repair the broken bone. I. large tendons which join and support the limb together, as much as possible so that it heals properly; and for this purpose there should be a lot of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that broken bones are of many kinds and in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the hip, and another when it is sharpened, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that is all a little cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to each kind there is its own tool, and its own instrument for restoration, according as the memory comes back to its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is caused by the breaking of the bone because the joints are twisted and open well from the sides, and press on with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or bumping, and the patient feels no great pain, it is not due to any fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well be due to twist, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not due to any twisting with the hand, but rather put medicines on it that come later, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that is in the shoulder, and these 3 parts are separated, now it is necessary to put them together evenly, so that the abscesses come out easily.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the abscesses have come out, then he should not rest for a day, until the abscesses are healed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then he should make it even with the knife that you can cut and trim lightly and carefully, and know that the healing of this is lighter than the healing of that which has pieces; then he binds it, as it is fitting hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	and if there is a bone with pieces broken, and if it is the hand or foot or any small member of the body, or two strings, or a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are in place, by all means return them to their places with your tools, and be careful that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the .ij. bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: if it is stretched well and does not move too much, do not press it so much as those who work on it with fire and contraction of the member do, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in place, so strictly keep the patient that he does not move it, neither awake nor sleep, nor turn, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when one feels no pain at all, almost not at all, and it is necessary to put in place the arrangement that one feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and guard well that it is put correctly, so that there is no twisting when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that there are various kinds of broken limbs, small and large and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs, and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and for those who are fat, such as the chest and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and sturdy linen cloth, because the large linen envelops the entire limb, holding it firmly together so that there is no gap;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	and then tie them lightly in three or four turns around the limb, and hold one hand over all the linen, then go up to the break and tighten it less, so that the break is slightly pulled away from the hand; car il est bon que li membre ne soit pas trop estraint sous peine qu’il en soit dommageable;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the joint little by little, until you press hard on the sound part of the joint, then take another joint, and turn it back quickly on the broken one;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the sound part of the fracture and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first joint above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the joints of linen or drapelets, until they are all even, then tie it all together with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that soothes the swelling and leaves it alone for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then tie them to your poles, and be of half a long line made red, or of a mast that is used for sailing, or of palms, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the pole that one puts on the break is a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also far away as necessary for the limb of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tie them to the poles also as you did with the first pole, then bind above a thread equally, as in the first pole on the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and the thread gets tighter, then looser again; and it is necessary that the string be neither too thin nor too thick, and that it be soft.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the string is thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their cords out of twisted linen threads, and that is a great mistake, because the thread cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it only comes to between each stone less than two inches of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the nails in his bones after the extraction in his health, so do not put them together with linen, or woolen cloth, so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the wound is broken, I will tell the cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to extract all the members of the body on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, it is not good to put on braces before 5 or 10 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess, and in a few days it will have healed.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and this is the method of the ancient braces for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour which holds to the walls of the mill, and confound it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common method of the brace restoring the fracture to many conditions, and most of all to women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of the brace restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take Z barars and lanolin and knotgrass and asfetida and gum arabic and myrrh, Z.Z.Z.; mirr and aloe, Z.v.Z.; alychil Z.viiij.Z.; and make a powder of them, and mix it with plenty of egg; this composition of the meat is hot, so use this brace, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones gently, and is worth to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plasters that is worth: take mugwort and chamomile, 1/10th Z. mirrra and aloe, 1/7th Z.; acacia vi. Z., well ground, and confit with oil or lots of honey, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of plasters that is effective for dislocated joints and broken bones: take a young lamb, and moil it in water and oil, and put it on the joint. These plasters do not help, but they are good to soothe hot abscesses and properly treat pain in the bone.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making plasters to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way of making plasters to heal broken bones and reduce inflammation: take roots of chamomile, violettes, times, and wheat; grind them together with a little wine, and apply it to the member that is warm. Alternatively, grind the roots with oil, and apply it to the joint with a little honey or oil of coriander.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to make plasters more strongly than the first, when the wound of the member comes to restoration. Take roots of plantain, and seeds of flax, buckthorn, melilote, and sycamore-bark, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; and grind them up, and confect with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras states that one should not put plaster on a broken member more strongly than the wax and oil cerots, and nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on a broken member things dry and warm, such as mirr, aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plasters for an injury and pain: take mugathon and horses' hooves, or feathers of ospreys, and plantain seeds, and wheat, all in equal parts; grind them up, and make plasters with it, and lay it on.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then pull it a little way apart, and see that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the jaw moved out of its place; if not, pull it by the hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if the pain or itching comes to a head, or there is no relief or swelling, then make haste and pull it apart and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it into the water, and raise up the jaw, until the itching ceases, and the pain is eased;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with water or rose oil, and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and rest the inflammation of the member, and be sure that the pain is gone, then start again with a gentle cautery, and a little plaster, and do not pull it out too strongly as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need to plaster and bind it, then start again, as you did at first, with even binding.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	If it does not come to the member at all, or only after three days or four days, and never more than ten days; according to what you see, as long as the break-up is slow, and the shoulder approaches the socket from below;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then you must restrain it more than before, and make its meat grow thicker, as I have said above; and if you see that the leather dries up more quickly than is necessary, know that the joint is coming together again;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then let it rise in warm water every time you release it, and let it rest for three days, and put salt on it;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	For this work, therefore, let the member be cut off at its root, and carefully what it has twisted, so that it returns the member to its place: this is bad, and if it is done with fear, and I see no other thing than to allow it to heal and to treat it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways to break something, and there are different shapes and causes, and they are distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are fractures that are made by the impact of an axe, and the collarbone is broken all the way through until it reaches the shoulder blade, just as it happens with a hatchet; and for this reason it is called "hatchet break".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear breaks through bone from above and is called in this way "absolute"; and the wound is of these great or small two breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact inside, or a blow from above or from the root of a stone, or from sitting on a stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing break, which comes close to the tendon that is outside the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that enters the bone slightly, as fine as a hair, and this break is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and causes a piece of bone to come out, and the head of the bone becomes displaced as the blacksmith does when he works on the bellows; if it enters between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those whose bones are moist at the top, so that they become deformed as the head of a child does.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and in all these ways of breaking, small pieces are formed, just like tiles, and I will speak about their treatment in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breaking by traction on them, and inquiry into their causes, and by the horse corrumpe who is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed upon. If the fracture is blackened, it will appear so.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, beware of accidents that may occur in patients, and if you do not see any bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, palmsiness, feverishness, and hairs standing on end, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, they cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any promising accident, and if you expect healing to begin, then start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the break comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most so that you can heal.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the chest, you must hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone does not rot, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the tissue that covers the skull, then it is necessary that you split the broken part so: and this is that you squeeze the head of the sick person, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more suavely than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the discharge of blood comes up when the bone is uncovered, or an abscess forms, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet cloth soaked in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And make the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and are sure of the discharge of blood; then begin to cut the bone, and it is done according to 1.j. ways of work: one way is that you chop at the narrow end before, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I pour .I. another amount, as great as the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different measurements, some are long and others are wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly, so that you don't bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is sharp and hard, so that you pierce it from within, as well as you bring together measurements with filets, not perfectly so that they pass beyond the bone at the back of the head, and must have a margin or a circle on top, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place at the back of the bone, so that you have filets for all test: and there are the 3 methods of filets:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce within the bone is that you put 1 filet on the bone, and turn back your two hands as much as you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the filet a little further away, and so do all around, then cut off the space of the bone that is between the openings, and do this more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools that you have, such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone pierced and treated, if you know that you retain the sharpness that is delayed from the bone to all .i. other instrument resembling an incisive, but it is necessary that it be more soft and more subtle than the other incisive;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it does not delay anything from the small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is slightly damaged by one of the instruments; then heal the wound with a lot of oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of opening it is that which Galen mentions, which is more effective; and press it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break opened; so that when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped incision, from which this form comes:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And don't cut from one side, and are the two sides of the flesh, so that the cutting is next to the bone; then, raise a small mallet above it, so that you gently strike the bone all around, and take great care of the tendon that is attached to the bone.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is injured to the bone, so that the bone is slightly broken, because the bone does not hurt easily, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone does not break through to the skin, and the bone is cut slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then smooth it with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to adjust each one according to the injury and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are more sharp razors, and then even smaller ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair tresses and subtle cuts, you must bring forth reason according to their treatment; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered to those who have placed their studies in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the medicine is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in oil and put it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another doubled cloth, or two, and wet it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do so lightly that you do not injure the medicine, then apply a third one, and do not stretch it out except to the extent that it covers the wound alone;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it for one or two days until the pustules are calmed, then remove it, and apply medicines as roots of herbs, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and aristolog, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and apply medicines immediately without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and guard that the wound be well-cleansed, so you do not leave it oozing, nor do you let it assemble the bow, for when the bow assembles over the web of the skull, if it is corroded and worn, it brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts on a medicinal sharp thing, if it stops above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care, therefore, that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the blackness comes only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and iii parts of rose oil and bind i drape of it to the medicine.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the medicine be cured in the way that suits it, until it is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Saiches that no time are broken the .ij. parts of the neck above, or the one by the sole, because they are .ij. bones; and that bone is cartilage, and does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the 2.ij. parts is broken, it is necessary that you stop your small finger or hurt from the neck, and put it equally in between your index finger and thumb, and towards the outside, until the neck revives according to its natural form;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the broken part is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you make it equal to the top of a small stick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if his fracture is of one-half, if you do otherwise, and hasten to restore the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess at the root has calmed down, then wrap it in linen cloths from the neck down, if his fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another with another from the other side, if his fracture is there; and let the cloths be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that there is no need to wet the cloths again, each day; it does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that the cloth be wet in sheep's fat and powder of millet; then leave the cloth, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put feathers in tents, and if you do, so be it. Take off the cover, and let the breeze blow on the patient; or make a knot as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess breaks out while you are working, so be it. Put cotton soaked in oil or a little bit of salve on it; or, as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not break out, put plaster on it from the outside, made of flour and powder of senna, mixed with alumen, then put it on light bandages, and do not tie the knot;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the knot is small and has broken into pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then cut the wound, and cure things that have been broken by it, and bind them together, and if necessary, put plaster on it and oil;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he has not within him no wound whatever, if he is cured of fever, and I put hay for him, as long as he is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the rupture of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the fracture is not very great, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inwards, then you must gently set it back into place.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger of the right hand into the mouth, gently push the fracture inwards, and with the other hand push it gently to the right. Make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is a fracture of the mandible, it should be treated in .ii. parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move, or there is a hole, then draw them out with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and put it on the broken jaw, and put 1. drapel double; and put on the drape a large well-made plate, or a piece of leather that is even, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it at the muys you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the appearance has changed, then remove it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply plaster, with powder from the mill, mixed with much egg white or flour of seed, after you have removed the cerote; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster applies, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it for as long as it remains healthy; many times is healthy in 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses burst, then treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, it is necessary that no piece of bone is broken; if subtle an ostable instrument is suitable for it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then open it with flame according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have broken all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, then put on it plasters suitable for him, to prevent infection, until he is healed.
de la forcele	forcele
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	The broken joints are often forced forward, above the shoulder, and the breakage is according to 1.2 ways: or it is broken and dislocated in 1.2 ways, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound. And the overtaking is when the break is without a wound, that you have 1.2 ministers, so that one tints the shoulder joint that is broken forward; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the need to extend further, so put on the shoulder an oval piece of cloth, or linen, and let it be large according to your need; and they raise and hold firm the piece, and draw it towards your hand, so that you make even the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder to the far side, because it comes out completely, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his side, and put the shoulder under a pillow, and place the ministers under the shoulder to hold it up; so that the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the break to your two sides, and if you find them broken, cut them with care; and carefully pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, use a tool like that of the incisor to put it back in place.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and make it like a spoon, and is not curly, and be also wide enough according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and have 1.5 inches, as you see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, as is the split of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are confident about the incisions, if the wound is hot, and the split is small, or if you doubt about the incisions, if you cover the wound with linen and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot incisions come, if you soak .i. linen in oil and water and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very broad band of a palm's width, and then put thereon 2 drapails double-folded, and the enplaastre; then take a thin stake of 15 inches long, and wrap it around that band, so that the top of the band hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put thereon the stake on the break, and turn the band on the neck, and desoz the asselle sainne, and desoz the asselle malaide; and the ramoinne of each one part, and when you see that the lieure holds the break in front, and you clearly see that the stake does not move upon the bone, then reward each day, and when the string slackens, if the restraint;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the malaide stand on his back, and let him put when he sleeps .i. small pillow desoz the asselle, to raise the ajutoire up; if the break is lightened by the aligement of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not loose it except in case of a bad accident, for .xx. days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	"Then begin the plastering of the shoulder if it has been displaced or is out of place, and only do so by touching it; shape the plaster according to the form of the displacement, and reset it according to its natural position in all ways that you can; then put on top of it powder from the mill with a lot of ash, and apply lightly, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, and release the board at the edge of the shoulder, so employ such a cloth as to cover the board evenly; and then hold it firmly in place, so that the board does not move from its position, and check it every day; and whenever it loosens, reset it, and put the board back into its equal position if it has shifted out of place, and lay the patient on their side; and the shoulder is healed in about 20 days or 25, And when these numbers are completed, if it loosens, be sure, for it is not bone that shifts easily."
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	"And if a piece of the bone has come loose, and not reset, so put on top, and the bone, and do as we said in the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder to calm down an abscess."
de la brisure dou pis	Of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this does not happen often; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken in the middle and falls backward, the patient feels great pain, and without support, and always, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the joints in the broken bone, and smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the sick person lies down on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together, and join the ribs of the two hands, and carefully make it equal in all ways as much as possible so that the shape of the bone is like this; then wrap it in a cloth, and stick it on the broken bone with plaster, or something light, and wrap it up tightly, and tie it firmly every hour, and if it relaxes, you tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened because corrosion or itching comes to the surface, or pain or swelling comes, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat it in a manner appropriate to the cure; then wrap the plaster on again, and tie it tightly until it is well.
de la brisure des costes	For the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	That the breaker of ribs comes only in large ones after the back, and to the head inside, and does not bend too much for those that are shiny; and the sound is good in the inquiry to the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And if he restores it so that you make the break even, just as it should be. And then put the plaster on, and tie it with a strap, if you need to do this.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of ribs is declining inside, then the patient feels great pain and aching, as if crying, for the bone is touching the membrane; and he gets dizzy and nauseous, a great deal of blood comes out, and it is a sign of grave illness, and the old ones have put up a great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of those who serve say that he should administer meat that swells the belly, to push the break toward the outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except when the abscesses are hot, unless they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let the skin be well-cured.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we should put vacuums on the spot, to suck out the excess, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, doubt arises that the vacuum might attract the excesses to the spot due to weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that we should cover the spot with another dry and oiled cloth, and place something between the sides to even out the moisture, then it is cured with the cure for plagues, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that protrudes from the flesh, then doubt is in the patient; so it is necessary to split at the top of the rib that is broken, and to put there an instrument for holding the medicine; and then the bone must be split, and pulled lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is well. And if the abscesses come out, so put them on cloth drenched in oil, and put them in place; and cure while the place where it is necessary for an absces to come, and be gentle on the rib where it must be, until he is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the break at the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes when the bones of the neck break, and there is no pain; and also to the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it is so that there is no pain in either one, and you know if he will be well or not, if you feel his hands soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with an needle, if he does not feel it. Know that it is deadly in many dispositions, and that if they are moved and felt, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient is cured, if cure is put on him.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you can see whether it is healthy or not, if the muscles are soft, and the accident that is in the hands, and on the back, windiness and digestion without will; and when it is revived on its belly, if digestion without will. And when it is revived on its back and it stiffens, it cannot. Know that it is deadly: so I would not work in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, he is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward him if there is an abscess, put oil or mutton fat on the spine, so that it is calmed down; then put on a compress of confortant and drying, and tie it with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are dislocated, cover it with the cure; and break the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and treat it with ointment of char in the meantime until it is healthy; and if the head of the shoulder is dislocated, it is called the "head of the collarbone", you hold it with your left hand, and put the plaster and plate on it, if you need to do so; then secure it, and if there are any bones that have come out, set them back in place, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	There was a possibility that the bone of the thigh might be fractured, and if so, that it would only be a small break at the top; let it grow long, and decline to the left side, and there is great pain for the patient in that place, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting-right [restoration] is that you extend your hand towards it as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, then make it equal in length to that which is in a natural state.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then bring the patient to her stomach, so that the setting-right of that break may be made for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then place a stake of wood or timber upon it, and hold the break so that it does not move; and set the joints on both sides, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calm, and put that which we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold it so that there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joints are what connects the neck to the top of the shoulder blade, and when it's broken, there are two ways to fix it: either with a wooden dowel or with a metal plate. With the former, you take a piece of wood that is wider than the joint but not so wide as to interfere with movement; then,
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And take two joints of wood that are long and strong, and tie them together at the top, and cut the patient on one side; then lay him down on his back with his arms by his sides, so that he does not move; and have a wooden dowel ready, and then place it under his shoulder blade with a weight on top of it; then take the broken joint and make it even with his hand, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that if you can wake the patient up, you hold his hand on his neck; then order two ministers: one to hold what is on the break even with his hand, and the other to hold down all the joints, and spread them out to their own parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too difficult, then stretch one joint out even with the break, and another on top of it, and spread them both out to their own parts; And if the break is near the top of the shoulder blade, then it is necessary to place a wooden dowel gently under the socket, and another one towards the neck, evenly with the break; then make the break even, as it should be, and hold it, unless an abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscesses come, do not extract them until .vij. days have passed, and put on a bandage of salt and rose oil, as long as the abscesses are calm; then extract them, and the way to extract them is that you put the plaster on the split, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the lou [elbow]; and wrap him up, and extract it by the joint, and by his arm, so that his arm is in its place of stars, if nothing harms it or if his bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use stars, and put on the split a wider and stronger star than the others, and have between each star 1 2 inches of space, and let each star be so large that it passes the split 1 3 times on either side; then extract on the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the plaster on the split, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the stars and the extraction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the abscess hot, leave it tied for seven days, as we have said; then observe each 1 2 days whether the swelling comes or not to the place, or if the redness does not appear at the member because it is too tight. If it does, put plaster on it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such an accident does not occur, do not remove the shoulder unless it has been three or more days, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; and place the aid between the toes of the foot, evenly, and watch every hour of the day or night to make sure that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become softer; if so, treat it by the virtue of medicine, and give him meat as we have said before, in such a way that the meat is at the first level; and when he begins to improve, let it be thick. It is customary that the aid and leg should be removed after ten months; then you must remove it and administer bath and medicines for the application of oil. And if the rigor is ugly and blocked, do not remove it until one or two months have passed.
de la brisure du bras	Of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one being small, and that one is attached to the wrist; and the other is large, and that one is attached at the shoulder. Perhaps one or both of these bones may break, either by itself alone, or together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fire is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the great one is broken, it is bad healing, and more painful than when it is broken all together. If it is only the small fire that is broken, then what is right to do is to extend it lightly, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the great fire that needs to be stretched more; and extend it on .i. cussin, and darken the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, and let the patient cross themselves over him in the middle, and .i. cussin in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers by their arms to the part where their hand is, or a .i. ligature, and other ministers on top of them. And then make the pouchet even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then place each one in its place, and if any of them do not want to hold on to the three, and you cannot reset it in its place, then put it on top of the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; so take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the treatment there are abscesses, then use a poultice made of oil rosin and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and place it gently above the abscess until the swelling has subsided. And then remove the rosin, and put the plaster of the powder from the mill with much egg, and put the bandages on, and let the break be a little wider than the others; and know that there should be vj. bandages or more in various places: whether the break is in one bone, or in two; and stretch it more above the break than anywhere else, and always less as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread that is stretched from linen be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And treat the limb and the ligature after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itch that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you soak the member with hot water until the itching has subsided; and let the member rest without being too tight. And then start again with the stretching, and if the ligature is soft and the bone has moved, and similar things, then adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the stretching should not come to the member, because it is too tight, then make it soft a little way, and leave it thus for some days, until the stretching comes, and then stretch it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then he will not be able until .xx. days; or if they do not heal, then he will hold his hands to his neck, and make his neck even, and guard against movement and turning over, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruiser is healed in .xxx. days or in .xxxv. days, and perhaps in .xx. days according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on our two hands there are few fractures, and come only that many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, then it is appropriate that the patient should cross his arms, and if he sits straight in front of him even; then put his hand on an extended towel, and extend the broken bones, and put them together even, as long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and stitches, if any, then put a bandage according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in 1. drapeil of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks in the garden between the legs of the plant, so make a rope out of sheets, and order the patient that he estrings it to its broken plant; and then extract it from a long sheet, and its string as large as the plant of the hand, and extract it, as is right.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks in the back, so that you put a string on top of it, and another one at the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tie the rope between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks on one of the two legs, so that it is even, so that you tie it up, as is right; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that there is a small right string to raise the break, so that it does not move; and if it breaks on the other leg, so that it is even, and tie it up with the healthy leg that comes after; or tie them all together, holding back, so that they do not hurt each other, or put a string on it, as I have said; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and help those who come to mind, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister to his side equally; and that is when the fracture is set into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the groin, then so is one of the links on his side, and the others beside the fracture; and if it is near the knee, then so are the links on either side of the knee, and the extension downward; then put the mirror to the bone equally with both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster on, and tie it up, so that the chas do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a chausie, then let it be calm and return to your work and your cure; the work is done in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture i . e. a bandage of tough twine in ii or iii joints, and wait for the excess fluid, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the birth, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, releasing the knee joint, and bring the head with the thread above; then turn on the leg and bandage, then put on the fracture braces, and put a brace on the bone of the leg; then use the stretch between the leg and the thigh of drapeels so that it is equal to the compression, then begin to bind form ii or iii twists on the fracture; and when you go up more on the fracture, and less the compression; then tie the 2 braces that are above, then return to the release at the head of the thread, until you come off from the foot; and let it be so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and if he comes no fever or swelling or any other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it lets go and turns this way or that, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold, if it is possible to do so, yes; and if it is not possible, if it is necessary to split the place and draw out firmly; and cure it as we have said, until he is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never does the thigh break in this way when we put braces on it, as in the aid and at the arm; however, in the restoration in this way done does not alarm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the cure is completed within a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the neck down
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Saiches that in the neck area there is sometimes a fracture, but it often heals many times. And if it breaks, let it be only a crack or a hole, and not a wound, for this feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the restoration be such that what is broken at both ends is made equal, as much as it can be; then put the plaster on, and put a round stake, if you need one, and hold it in place as it should be, and follow all the dispositions we have said for other breaks, such as an aposteme, and others that seem necessary; and let each accident have what is needed to be healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Saiches that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are similar to those of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done as with that of the arm equally, and the workings are all alike.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones break together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone breaks, then it turns forwards.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, so that one feels great pain and sees it well; then return to dislocation. Then prepare an extension, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but, nevertheless, it is fitting that the fracture should be ugly, and it has more pieces, so that the extension should be smaller and lighter; and make it even according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, so take 30 pieces of rope that color the leg on one side and another, and let them be long from the ankle up to the dislocation; then wrap them in 31 bands above and below, and bind it firmly in the middle, and at this binding cannot move the leg to the right or left, and so is good; and no one administer 30 bands of rope, and if it is rope, and put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture or there is a sore; and stir each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if heal as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bone of the foot comes in several fractures and in two places, and it happens only that it is broken in more than one way.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it should happen that the bones of your foot are broken and you see these bones overtopping one another, then put this patient down upon the earth as if he would walk, and now place your foot upon his own, where the bones are raised up again, then press them together as much as they will go back into their places; then place the plaster and fill it in, and put a small table of 10.5 inches square at the bottom of your foot, then fasten it to the front of the foot, then you have wrapped your drapes and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then lift up the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, then reset them, as we have said for the hands; then put a small piece of wood between the two according to their length, and make it one size larger, then put the little table on the foot as I said, and strain it forward; and if there are more than three or four pieces broken, then each one should have a piece of wood according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen drape, and the table should be straining behind the foot; and let it hang down from the top of the table so that it covers the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things that I said for breaking things; and attend to each injury as it occurs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from breaking of the bone with a knuckle
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is broken in the nature of a woman, if she is sat up enlarged, then she is tilted to the part of the back, and held behind; then fill the bail with cotton, and put there as much as 40 pounds; then turn the woman over, and tap the back little by little, and then drop the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the pound; and when she goes to piss, if she holds the cotton, and when she has pissed, let her put it back again, and so do 15 days or more: then will be restored the break, and if she is dead, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a chain to the crotch, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow in the chain shaping, until the bladder is gone inside: the nature will then return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the knuckle bone of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breakages are not hidden from him who puts his study and use thereon, and listens to my book. For the break, therefore, signifies many things in the right way of restoration: hear it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the hymen, when it is broken, take an oiled goose and pour the oil onto the hymen; then wrap drapes around, and leave them 2-3 days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	from rupture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, let it be healed now, so that the healing that we have described serves as a witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, unless there is another injury, then begin to restore the fracture in this same hour, or that very day, for the bones of the hip and shoulder or similar do not heal quickly.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the bones begin to heal, do not continue the restoration work until the next day, provided that the bones are calm and there is no pain; for you would bring about a bad accident if you worked on them for three or four days.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on both sides of the bridge; so that you should put it gently with your hands to extend it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not align your hands so that they are equal in length, take this instrument made of iron, which has 2.5 inches or 3 inches of length, and its thickness is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he immerse himself in mirrhe that he takes 3 or 4 drops, according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your touch, and be sharp before, and thick in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because the head of the shoulder that is dislocated must be placed on the top of the bone; and tap once, until he recovers, and make them equal one to another. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must cut the top of the bone until the instrument can take it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, in your power; then cut this one that remains in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is set back in place, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. If it is in its natural position, then soak it. I.e., wrap it in black wine-styptic cloth, and make sure it is clean; and do not put any tar or other oil on it where there is oil, so that it does not cause pus and corruption to come forth; then administer balsam when you have set the bone back in place, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not tightened with the break; and many times this has been done to the sick, both those who are dead or corroded; and the ligatures are softer and more gentle than others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an accident has not come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it does not suit you to put on esteles; but wrap them up hard, in place of esteles, with tough wraps, and tie them. And when you see after 1 day or 2 days a bow come to the wound, if you take off what you have put on it all wet, and apply healing ointments, as healing tetrafarcion and others.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb 2 times a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and whole.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the bow moves down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if someone runs and cannot fix it but comes together again like this, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, you should put a wound on it, and remove all these painful pieces.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula appears at the place or any other corruption, you should treat it according to what he said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opens on the limb, as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar bones of large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but let it rot; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And the bruses that come out of the ground:
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come back again to the health of the broken, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is a foul sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make its natural movements.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore that we come back to the health of the broken, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is a foul sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make its natural movements.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and remains after weak and thin members for some causes: because one is too tied up, and was not tied up so as it should be; or because there are too many joints, and cannot come to the member's aid; or because of many injuries; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because he has little blood in his body, so weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the torso soft, as many times as the sun rises in him; and he bathes it, and gives it pleasure and joy; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and he rinses it often with warm water, until the swelling corre to the member; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the tortured member after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural work: do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; and such works are blamed, and great harm and even death may result; however, if the nodules and tortures are fresh, it is good to bathe them with hot water, or with soft herbs boiled, such as lamb's ذيل، and melilot، and similar things; and make an ointment. i.e., a mixture of melilot with lard or oil of sesame, and put the ointment on; or take fat figs, and crush them with hay from colon, and other medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is no need to break the bone again to rub it continually and for a long time with moist hands. And move the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the stiffness is strong and hardened, just as with a stone, it must be cut with a sharp knife lightly; and put on a leech and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, if it is now brought back into place, then let it not be pulled again.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Car s'on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c'on le déplace à l'oure qu'il est enflé: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, and the swelling increases, and by chance it is put back in place at its original location; for this does not come well, that one moves it before it has decreased: many times it brings spam and other pains; however, when this happens, take care of the patient, then let him rest, until the abscess has calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each member as the wound heals.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the remedies for dislocations of the shoulder blade until it is completely healed.
des mandibules	The jaw.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And so the jaws should be dislocated upward, and the dislocations of both are according to .ij. ways: or they are a little out of place, and soften a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down toward the chest, and cut the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are small, return them to their original positions by means of numerous configurations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the malady, and pour a little water from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, the dislocations are of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be far away, to make it equal; and command to the disease that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he looks at the bone equal, as long as it is found in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And he is brought back in place, especially if the two jawbones are together, but with warm water and oil, a little at a time; do not delay bringing it back as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back in equal position, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with a mild poultice made of oil and wax, then put it gently on a bed covered with moistened drapes;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on his back, and his cheeks are between two pillows, so that he does not move or strain at all, but eats soft food until the pains have gone away, and the jaws have healed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then gently cut what needs to be cut, and do not work to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their place within an hour and are not restored to their places, then fevers and unusual heat will come, and perhaps a stomach upset, and perhaps vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a bad sign; and often many die who have it, in seventeen days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the cost at its base and along its length, and it is dislocated many times at the edge and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put the plaster over it and bandage it, and hold it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the shoulder that is toward the chest cannot dislocate; if not, and if it is dislocated at all, if one returns it to its place as we have said; then put the plaster on it and bandage it, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is well;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the dislocation of the shoulder, when it is removed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	that the shoulder is dislocated only two ways: either because of a fall or because it has been struck; and the second is in the upper part of the joint, and sometimes in the lower part, and rarely on top; and this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and never dislocates behind the shoulder, and never dislocates inside the shoulder blade; and many times it dislocates forward towards the arm, but only when they have fallen; for those who have enough money to go to hospital, there is no problem, but for those who do not have enough money, they go back home with pain.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	and sometimes there is an impact or breaking of the shoulder by a blow from above, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you test it until you are certain of it, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And a dislocation occurs when it is turned downward toward the shoulder, and you will find a clear difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will see between them a manifest diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and set the shoulder to the touch, at the head of the shoulder, as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its neck, nor move any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, so it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touch.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not just to bring back when it is new, or the patient has fallen ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then place your thimble above the joint, and raise the joint with force to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, and then put it back; so come to hospital quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in the hands of days later, it is convenient that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister administer soothing and softening, as a decoction of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and be administered;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	and then let the sick person lie on his back, and place on the shoulder a thimble of equal size, not too soft nor too hard, then put the minister's foot on the thimble, and lift the hand of the sick person gently;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and let others ministers burn the chief of the shoulder of the disease, so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see if you do it according to this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and so that you have it present .i. a man who is greater than the disease; and be right towards the coast, and turn down the shoulder of the patient, and lift up the shoulder in height, so that the patient hangs by the armpit;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and let others ministers pull the hand of the disease down towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then go with him something heavy, and the dislocation will come back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the ram is also done in another way: and it is 1st. a long stick in the earth, whose head is also as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	And then set the fire cautery on the patient, but that it have a drape of wool upon it, and let the patient be lying long in the bed; then extend his hand from one side to another, so that the joint returns to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return because of all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take .i. beam of .iiij. arms long and .iiij. fingers wide, which has the head standing on the end so that it can enter into it perfectly dislocated the joint, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then put it on the top of the head with a drape of wool so that it does not harm the patient, and then set it on the shoulder; and extend your arms up the long back, and place the aid on the top of the back, and the hand at the top of the head, and then put the arm on 1/4 of a stone's width, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from one side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Then when it is in place, in whatever way, so that you put on the shoulder a woolen ball equal, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and ambergris, all over the shoulder and around, then strain it out of the shoulder forward, and tie it on the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands be in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he sweat a little while the members are comfortable, for he will heal faster; and then sweat him more after .v. days or .vij., and move him. And if he is stiffened and is not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or some other cause, it is necessary that you apply the cauterization to three times, as it is placed before or with the paste of the cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and he sweats after .vij. days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm overhead, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are either cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never been placed back in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is above the shoulder blade, and the shoulders, or behind, is made by impact, and stretching of the hands, and I administer another place; and heal as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slow movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is healed, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Says that the joint of the neck is dislocated in one place and returns to its place; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for it can be seen and felt clearly; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the bad neck with good health, if you can see it openly. For the joint is cut off, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder on all sides.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must bring it back in the same way as the aphorisms and the vein comes, because if the aphorisms and the vein come, it is grieved to be brought back; and by chance it cannot be brought back all at once, but more so when it is behind; it hurts more than other dislocations, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the hand according to the heart from behind and from the side, and press the joint to its roots together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then return when it doubles its hand back to its hand, and firm from the root of the palm the ear that is down;
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and is that the two minister extend the arm, and tint them two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he grasps the joint with his hand, if it does not contain any oil to smooth the joint, then form the joint tightly until it regains its movement.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, if you put plaster dry with ash of olive, and strain it firmly, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then release it slowly.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, then release the ligature, and leave it; and if you see that the joint has not healed well, then begin again with plaster and the ligature, and leave it for a while, until it is firmly in place; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a sheep fat cream, then leave it for a day and a night, then wash it, and let it enter or bathe;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sues, he rubs the joint gently, then puts on the new one and then goes in or bath; and so do .ij times or .iij., until he is healthy; and if you see it, put on the end of the wet horse with melted butter, and pull it up; it will come back to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocated hand comes back easily, more so than other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, especially when the joint is swollen or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the re-positioning is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and he looks at it to make them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it comes back.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	All the same, it is necessary that you look to see if he is in the right place; then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the sick person' s back of his hand on a table and look at the appearance of the joint; if it comes back now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then cut off the excess skin around the joint, and let him leave in this way weakened.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back after a few days, then let the joint turn;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and it cannot extract anything completely: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other mechanism except to extract by fire cautery; and perhaps there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put fire cautery on as we said; then extract and leave it for a while; then dislocate and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, then the hot water moisten it and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	None are dislocated on either side of the hand to each part, none on the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore are the two, and bottle up the dislocation to your fists until it revives, then hold the head of the two, and lean it towards the part where it is joined;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and then let it be for .ij. turns, and then put it equal that day; and of not, so as we have said, and dislodge from day, and make it move, and relock it; and do this often, until it is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do this too, if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same thing, if it is dislocated from the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Do not dislocate the shoulder of the horse at the height of the withers.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the horse's withers or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there can be no cure because it quickly kills the animal.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excretion is without control, and cannot be held back, and many limbs are weakened, or the two legs or the two arms or one leg .
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shoulder is mute in three parts; that which is mute at the rear is called "gilbosite".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If his hunchback came from childhood then he can be cured; if not, there is no cure or recovery for him at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with great words, which do not give any great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the hunchback that comes before the pitch, there is no remedy or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and this is the first sentence I will translate for you:
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and so that the patient is extended on his back in an even position and has not had any strain placed on him, so that he does not bleed;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put 1. tinder to the head on the ground formed, and 1. other at the feet, and tie a knot over the patient's eyes, and 1. other at the ankles, and at the knees, and at the hips;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the 2. tinders;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well closed, the twig as we have said, and the mirror sets its palms on the spine forming, until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not recover with this cure, then take a table of  .iij. arms long, and shove it against the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and dip the head of the table against the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and let the mirror put its palms on the other head of the table, and press well, until he revives to his place; and if you see this, do it at the turner that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you put .iij. torches at the head of the sick person with an arm long, and between each torch, one above and one below, a palm's space apart;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and place in each log .i. pierce, or the pole runs, and let the logs firmly be in the ground so that they do not move, and between each two logs let there be one log turning, so that the bond turns, and let there be in each of two turning logs .i. turning pole of a palm long, to turn the pole.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the bond that is between the logs to the pole at the top, and the other bond towards the poles at the other end, and each of the servants turns its bond to all the log, and the master places the stake evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on desiccant with much ash, and then the stakes, and then the stake of a tablet of a palm long, that by purifying the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie a bond of a log, as we have said, and use subtle emollient to him until he is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes to an end in the health of it, if necessary administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stake that we have said above; and never administer a piece of lead.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never comes the appearance behind the spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and this bone which opens, so that one should not have presumption: by chance would come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	that the hip and shoulder joints only come with dislocations, not as in other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to three.iiij. parties: inside and outside, and before and behind, and more inside, and less before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and opens more the sick foot than the healthy one, and cannot bend the sick knee on fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the limb which is swollen with feverish heat from an abscess, for the head of the hip comes to lie there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that person who is going to die, if this accident is opposite to those above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that person who is going to die, if this accident is opposite to those above. However, if his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double the knee due to pain, and if he is made to walk, he cannot do so before, and reten
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that person who is going to die, if this accident is opposite to those above. However, if his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double the knee due to pain, and if he is made to walk, he cannot do so before, and reten
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	If the dislocation is old and delays according to its habit, there is no cure for it; and it is only right that he should have been presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that which the dislocation is new, and it is of the four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to restore the joint, and turn it inside and out, and move it to the right and to the left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back in this way, you must have very strong help, and firmly support the leg with two hands, or a ligature tied on the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and others extend their hand above him in such a way that they press their hands together, then tie a ligature around his thigh; and others hold the hair of the ligature;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend up and down all at once, as long as the sick person is raised from the ground once, and remain so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then you should put the patient on his back. When the dislocations are in the paregorico position, if it is convenient that you put the sick person on his side, then set the ligature on the root of the hip, and the line that is removed from the angle, then extend the ligature upwards towards the angle, and upwards towards the forceps;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then pull the arms of the sick person, and embrace the large line of the hip, and extend it to the side: so he will return to his position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot fasten it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the .ij. feet of the patient together with a strong thread under the .ij. heels, and under the .ij. knees, so that the sick leg is longer than the other by .ij. two;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang him by the neck of a post, and be above ground 2 arms long; then order 1 minister to embrace the hip of the patient, and let others hang down with the patient, who embrace his hips firmly, because the joints will come back into place quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is far away, if the patient lies down as we have said in the case of gilo-boseity, and draws 1 thread properly on the sick leg, and also on the foot;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put 2 torches, 1 at the head and 1 at the feet, then put 1 torch between the hips of the patient so that it goes in his middle;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and put on him a wet cloth from behind, that he may not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the doctor set the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on a .ie. table and press him as we said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, extend the injured leg outward, and according to what I have said; and let the doctor put his hand on it from behind, then press with the other hand, and raise it towards the hip.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And when the dislocation is on one side, so it is not possible to extend the injured leg outward, nor to raise it towards the hip; then it is necessary that he should lie on his back with both legs outstretched, as we have said in the sleep on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and is placed on its face, and the limb extends as we have said above, and must be firmly pressed against the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then take the poultice, and put on the plaster, and extract an arrow, so that the shin does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rests for three days or four, then unbinds it, and puts on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, as before, and leaves it in place. three days; then unbinds it, and lets him bark loudly, until the limbs are comfortable again.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the kneecap
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The genoux is dislocated according to three ways: namely, inward, outward, and rearward; do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he does not bend it at the knee, that he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the treatment for all of this is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your legs;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee with your hands, and pull it between your two, then bend the .iij. knees together like a knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux returns to its place, and the signs are that he has moved his leg at the knee lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and place the plaster on top of it, and make the leg rest in the lap, and bind it together tightly .iii or .iv days, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, as long as the limbs are not comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not in place, then give a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	from the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully dislocated or realigned, and they go in and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has come out.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The following text is the translation of the provided Old French text:
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has come out completely, so that you make the patient lie down flat on his back, and tie him up by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	And then try the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand, and then again with your right hand, and then stretch it out, and blow on the foot well;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this .ij. times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; if not, then begin again with the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	if it cannot return in this way, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place 1 pass firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie a cloth around it, so that he does not injure the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then put the minister's hand on his buttocks, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to .i. a cord, so that he lays it on the top of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and place the cloth tight between the patient's buttocks to hold the patient in place while you are working;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then make the patient's dislocated arm equal with his hands, and other ministers will dye the healthy leg with tar, and the dislocation will return completely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is ready, if you apply the plaster and wrap it up tightly, and form the bandage well, and fasten the foot to the leg, and guard against the tendons behind the ankle being too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then let it rest for .ij. or .iij., and if the bandage is loose, then untie it after three or four days, and do not send the patient away before .iiij. days have passed;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form quickly, then it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy again.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it is gently extended without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the lower back or foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a bed or table all straight, and place your foot on what opens up these joints, and then press with your foot in this form, until he returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then put the foot on a table of .ij. shoulders, then extract it shaped, and leave it .iiij. days, then unpick it; and let it rest as long as it is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with the dislocation, and it is reset, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow to anger, do not be arrogant:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing ointment, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, so I put back the member in place, that way the soothing ointment will come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, so administer soothing ointment, and cure the wound, as appropriate, with dry compresses;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a dislocation with a fracture, and small bones are broken, if the bones, do as we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you dear according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here is the translation:
