O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in a vision it came to me that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is unfamiliar to all, it has been lost, and nothing remains of the ancient knowledge except for small descriptions in books that have been handled by hand.Et quanque li fuers ne puet estre prescheve par les livres ne par les uers, et n’est riens quere demore, si convient que le corps soit traittre en la cirurgie, et li fuers estorbes par les mains, s’il poait estre.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and alienated knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Here I seem to want to give life to it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of teeth, and the movement and of their veins both moving and resting, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hypocrites says that he who knows the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, must be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who interfere in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in the groin of a man, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui copa une veine de brasse d’une femme et li donna tuit li sangs qui estoit en la veine, si que la femme cheit morte adont.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I saw another who lanced a vein in the breast of a woman and gave her all the blood that was in the vein, so that the woman died then. And I had already been called to treat her, and I saw the nature of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out she would have died then.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who had broken his leg treated by a doctor from our land, and with the break there was also an open wound; and the ignorant doctor bound up the fracture on top of the wound with a splint, leaving the wound uncovered, and instructed him to keep it that way. As a result, the leg became badly swollen, as did the foot, and both ended in gangrene.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to attend him, and when I arrived, I hastened to release the leg from its binding. When I did so, he felt no pain and was at ease.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption within the limb had already set in and could not be healed; and the decay continued to spread throughout the limb until it was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess that had become infected due to the negligence of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a ulcer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And so, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each section of this book where there is doubt and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Now take up your weapons in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases of grief behind, and put away from you what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galienus says in one of his warnings: "Do not ignore a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the craft.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cold cautery and medical tools, and it is ordered from the feet to the head; and of instruments and tools, and all that is necessary in the craft. The second chapter is also about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torques, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about this and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with a little of their words, for I abhor lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be the .ij. complexions: namely, the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some people say that cautery is of great aid; others say the contrary: that cautery does not help in diseases that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because fire's nature is hot, it should not be treated for hot diseases with heat, nor for dryness; and those who say otherwise state that cautery helps a great deal in hot and dry diseases that affect the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this opinion.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, one should not practice this without first having experienced it oneself, and knowing through long usage the nature of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the pace at which they progress; we have no fear of treating the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the use of cauteries.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and is of greater benefit than a burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple, and does not harm except the member which is burned, and does no harm to any other part if properly applied.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another by contact, bringing grievous diseases and often causing death.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study; and I stand upon the truth of things - therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on which days cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable time.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness beneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially when cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until a time when greater harm might come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish believe; for there is no recurrence of the disease that is healed by cautery; and they say it is so, but it is not as they think, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexion, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than other medicines for their swiftness in action, and for the virtue of their work and significance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may sometimes depend on the complexion of the patient and the location and nature of the disease, and are assembled in him due to the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess humors and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true. But they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine; their intentions are false. Cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cautery and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is milder than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or because of the height of its substance; but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true, as I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some people; and cautery with gold is milder than with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it will bend in the fire; and thus there are many difficulties.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two reasons for it being used in a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for many diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solving medicine which purifies the head for three or four days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, it will bleed—then heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare", and this is how it should be used:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while squeezing gently in a circular motion; then lift your hand gently and check the area again to see if there is any bone exposed; if not, then repeat the cautery as I have described until you do see bone. Then take some salt and place it in soft cotton, and apply it to the wound; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until the wound is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And according to the ancients, when a wound is left open for longer, it purges more effectively; and because of this, they recommend using leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burnt, and then have the burnt portion of bone removed and the wound healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must apply the cautery and press so hard that one dislodges a portion of bone as wide as a woman's thimble, in order for the humors to flow out; then leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should cleanse and dress it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be entirely good for anyone, except in cases where there is fear; and I prefer to leave it as it is, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, just as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems better and gentler to me, so I use this method together with it.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', as well as cleansing of the head with oils and poultices. If they then receive the cautery that we mentioned earlier and it is ineffective,
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not too cold in nature, then cauterize them under this cautery a little bit as we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we mentioned earlier, and also cauterize in the place called 'vessel'; there is a spot for which cupping glasses are placed; ease your hand so that you do not reach the bone, as the patient will feel much more pain with this cautery than with the others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and the other treatments I have described in the section on diseases have been carried out, but none of this helps: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	For the cautery with medicine, take an egg, remove the shell and coat it with a mixture of honey and vinegar, and then apply it to the shoulder where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the egg underneath the skin. Then, after it has been applied for twelve hours, remove it and treat the area with butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed; and if you see fit, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth section on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery with fire is performed as follows: Heat the cautery tool so that it is red-hot and then apply it to the area where the pain is located, moving it in a circular motion. Once the skin turns white, remove the tool and repeat this process several times until the pain is relieved.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called a "close" because the chief is made in the form of a cloak, with a small curve at the top, and in the middle has a small appearance; and he puts it over the painful spot, and holds his hand and twists it slightly, so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lifts his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is deflected, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, he puts cotton in the wound, and keeps it for three days; then he puts moistened cotton on the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called  "cultellare", do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
de emigraine	of a hemorrhoid
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure hemorrhoids as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called   "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign on the painful spot a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and press so that you do not touch the artery and so that it does not reach the bone; and be careful of the jaw so that it does not bite when one chews, and let the nerve have no regard for the bite and let no spasm come to harm, and be careful of the blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or the cutting has great fear and especially for someone who is not experienced and untried; and leave the wound open in the middle; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called 'the point', whose composition is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the affected ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and then move slightly upward from the root of the ear after you have identified the site to be treated; and there should be .x. points around each ear; afterwards, treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for those torments which are caused by flujoes of blood, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and no cautery should be used for conditions that originate from dryness or inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of mouth torture caused by blood flujoes and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you should use three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another just above the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips. Apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear, about a finger's width below the horn of the head, and another cautery above the temple, as long as a finger. Leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burnt; this is the shape of the cautery instrument:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is similar to the scalpel we described earlier, but it is a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker. After treating the area as described, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called 'vassels', as we have said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. And let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; after that, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster which is described in the book of plasters to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, do three cauterizations in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a distance of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let the cautery be what is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of chill from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and of that which we have previously discussed; after washing the head of the patient, then make cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the heart is burned most, and lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and use the cautery which is called "olive" that we have discussed before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have discussed in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; then press the head in milk, and make .i. cautery according to what we said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is forceful and painful, make cauteries as I said for the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in a child, make him  .i. delicate cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with part cauteries as we said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been described before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have bound the head of the patient; then make a well-fit bandage, as a circle, and place it around the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and be held tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, and use the fat of an old ram; and heat it gently over fire so that the person can bear it; then remove the bandage from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make many small pricks all over the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in grease and tallow of a young cow on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awesomeness first comes to the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to hold his head steady, and he cauterizes in the middle of the head, and makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descents of the eye are both together, or .i. if the descent is .i.; and close all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood letting, and if you see too much blood issuing out, then stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	I will teach you the extraction of arteries and incision under the two bones at the back; and sometimes cauterization or hatereil is done under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or within the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outward; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the middle of the head, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatereil under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over .i.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the discussion, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, shave his head and cauterize the middle of the cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just below the hairline; and be careful to avoid the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called  "olivare". This is how to make it:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two sorcerers, make two cauteries on them as long as the sorcerers are; and do not leave off with the hand until a third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pokes the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are turned towards the inside, and poke the eye, and they make cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy position; after that, draw on the paper the shape of the leaf of the myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and mustard seed paste on the eye, then heat the cautery so that it has this shape.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cauterize little by little according to the shape you drew, so that the skin is burned in the right place; and the sign of the health of the eye is that you see the paper lifted up, and the hairs raised at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand and leave it like that for three days, then put wet cotton in butter until the burn is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs grow and the paper becomes soft, then start the cautery in the same place again, just as you did before; and if the hairs are torn, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and even, and do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment into the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one-third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put under the eye cotton wet with egg white; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if in both, as well; and put under the eye cotton wet with egg white; and let the patient's head be in a healthy position and put your hand showing over the medicine, and press a little and move it all the time that the patient feels stinging from the medicine, because he feels stinging just as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the bite has passed, lift the area, and check if you see the skin raised as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; if so, all is well. If not, apply more medicine to the area where the medicine didn't take effect, until your work is even, and your eyes are focused; then place wet cotton in a cloth until the burn is cool, afterwards clean the area of the ointment which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes. And if the skin becomes soft after, and hairs grow in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area which is softened by the skin properly, just as you did before; afterwards clean it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle wand:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this are your constraints; and do not be reproached for the straight path to one who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold their head steady so that it does not move or turn; then soak cotton in white vinegar or pepper juice and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery which should be shaped like a pen, with a pointed tip, or like a tent; but overall, the cautery should be curved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and drain any pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it and draw out the fluid; next, place the hot cautery firmly on the oil gland, holding the cautery at the spot below the eye where the nerve is located, taking care not to cause pain; apply the cautery directly to the grease of the eye gland and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you reach the bone at the start of cauterization, that is good. If not, then repeat the cautery again if necessary and leave it for three days; then put on wet cotton in butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is still unhealed, then apply an corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and the king will follow what happens in his kingdom.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients mentioned. Cut to the fistula, and make an incision; then put into the slit a small piece of cotton wool with which the shape [of the fistula] is known.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of a bean; and hold your hand or the cotton firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye; and one should put on the patient's eye wet cotton in olive oil or in water: the lead melts the fistula, and heals it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, that is good. If not, then one should apply an incision to the vein, and bring the fistula back into the body of the vein according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with ointment until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, it causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described under 'Fistulas', but if it does not heal: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleaning out the fistula's opening, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches its depths; do this once or twice, after treating it as we have described in 'Treatments', until it is healed. And if it is cured thus, then it is good; but if not, you must open up the area and remove any decayed bone, according to what you find in his throat.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, which will be described below, in such a way that you place one end of the hot cautery on the tooth; and hold the other end of the cautery over the root of the tooth, and keep your hand steady so that the heat reaches the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and re-heat the cautery as needed; after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them gargle for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth which was loose is made firm, and the soft gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or swelling, and medical treatments do not help, then cauterization is needed in two ways: with a cautery made of butter and with fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is done by melting butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; and do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the wool and cotton moistened in the cold butter, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it must be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. After heating the cautery, whose shape will come out later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down. Do this several times, as the pain will be removed on the same day or the next. The patient must fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then rinse afterwards; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on whichever tooth you want, according to what you are able; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and is not responsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that the shape comes out as described below, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, going to the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for 3 days. Then dress the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with solutive medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come up to the throat, but only scorch the chest slightly. Then make another cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, using the cautery called "clavicle", as we have described earlier; and treat the area as we have said before, until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the breast in their usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; using the cautery called "clavicle" as described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, make cautery at the point with all the cauteries called "points", as the form is described earlier for diseases of the ears; and let the points reach up to 30 or even higher. After that, treat the area as described before, and use 3 cauteries according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason, cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, treat the patient's back and sides with fomentation; then gently press the heart, which is inside the chest, with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two tines like a fork, here is its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the chest until it pierces to the rib, and the figure of the cautery will appear with four cauteries; and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerve follows the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted above this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the crushed porridge on the cautery, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens, then make a cautery on the thickness of the cautery with a key, or with many cauteries piercing. For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of a cautery of phlegmon
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should do cauteries of phlegmon with roots of aristologe, and in such a manner: take a long root of aristloge as thick and long as your fingers; moisten it in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize. Perform 1 cautery between the chin and neck, and 2 small cauteries slightly lower in the area below the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and 1 cautery on the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the breast away from the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancients said that one should use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the phlegmon; and if he jumps away from the pain, as we have said in the phlegmon of the liver. But in this procedure there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula may result which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouth
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the moon with what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help at all, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries, marking according to the length of the moon, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, but let the patient lie on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery that has two or three needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the coccyx where the pain of the moon comes from the right side towards the left, and the elevation by which you lift the coccyx according to the coccyx, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, put the two needles into the flames until the coccyx is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you see fit, cauterize the entire cautery with three needles. After the cure, when it has bled for a long time, and this is worth as much as any of the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is of no use for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "ascites." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then you must make .iiij cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one by the anus; and the cauteries should be close to the hard part of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the clave as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus the yellow water will be driven out, and the cautery should be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other above, midway up the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without cleaning, until the water comes out; then clean this as we have said regarding the other cauteries.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive power in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with a strong pulse, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about the cautery on the stomach, using a circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the belly with a thin cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, either one or more, and are old and consist of thick, cold, and corrupted moist humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that is, all defecated below the anus, a little by little in a triangular shape; and two cauteries under the belly.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swollen, then on the face .i. large cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the mouse at all the cautery clave; and let the cautery open for a long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you scrape the thelul, use a cautery that looks like  .i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on the scraped thelul; and let your hand stay so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or  .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on a wound, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a person has a fistula, and it is swollen and exudes pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe it with a thin needle, and be careful to feel how deep the fistula is. After heating the cautery iron like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how far the needle went in, and repeat the cautery until the infected and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, according to the amount of pus; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, be careful of those areas, and do not apply the cautery too close to them, and think that it is not sensitive; after curing the area until it is healed, and if the opening is swollen and the matter is not discharged for a long time, then know that the fistula is completely healed. And if the matter is not discharged, know that the fistula has pierced through, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will discuss in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and with violent winds, and it does not take talent from a woman, then you should apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other with the clave cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 3 cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then one should cauterize the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region emerge, both on the right and left, and each cautery should be as long as a man's thumb; and one should also do another cautery below the back, or two if you need them; and the cauteries should be flat according to the previously mentioned shape.
de la marris	of the mouth
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mouth is cold and moist, and it cannot conceive, and the buds are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then one should do three cauteries around the mouth, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and the cauteries should be flat, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and because of this it moves out of place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the places of the dislocation are found wet, then you must cauterize the dislocation on the hip with a 1. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make 3 large cauteries of the olive oil, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: so you must purge the disease of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After that he must be cauterized; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, with burning medicines together, and with fire. Fire cautery can be done in many ways, one of which is as follows: cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, making a deep and large wound, and between each cautery there should be a space the thickness of a thumb; the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it so that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way that is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, then he should be cauterized where the pain is felt with two cauteries there where the pain holds; and one cautery above the ankle bone of the fourth toe, on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be cuticular, and burn the thickness of the heart. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to one or both sides of the foot, then he should be cauterized there where he feels the pain with three cauteries there, called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, use a knife or circular cautery, and be careful with all your cauteries that you do not leave it on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	I myself have seen several who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and rotten all over the foot. Afterwards he died from a stomach ailment.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery on one and on the other, according to this method. // And they said to the wise man about the cautery of the hip, whose method is this: make a piece of iron as big as a little finger at the tip, or a little less, and let it be between the teeth, and from one tooth to another a distance of the amount of a thumb joint; and let the teeth be apart in two places, and also like nuts, and have a good handle made of iron. And this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and dripping hot, and then put it on the box of the hip that hurts, and turn it to the healthy side; and cauterize it once with one cautery and leave it for 3 days; and then use a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment is cured until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; nonetheless, it is one of the good cauteries which those who can bear it should apply where it is needed.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact or excessive evacuation, or due to cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is cautery beneficial except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has voided foul pills or other similar substances, to place a fire mark on their back where the pain is located, marking three lines intersecting at right angles, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cautery should be performed using the cautery called "pin"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight chest when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine in the back and in us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and cure it, cauterize it with the hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the cautery turns purple on every part of the spine equally, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed iron .ij. or .iij. lines apart and let the points be close together. After this, cure the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in a place that has swelling which is on top of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	The vertebrae of the neck are at the base of the skull. And when you want to cure the spine, if you cannot get the spine to be healthy according to what we have said, then cure the area where the strain is and do not put the cautery on it, because the nerves are close to the head.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are caused by moisture that is spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it can be treated with cauterization in this way: make a mustard cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this formula:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to apply the cautery on the instep of the foot, apply it with a small point. And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, apply cauteries above each knee in groups of three or four, using olive-colored cauteries throughout; and if you need more, apply more, but do not hold your hand against the skin longer than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have described in its chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, apply mustard to the wrist for one inch; and if any pain remains in the fingers, apply mustard to each joint and to the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and exercise good judgment with the patient and give medicine. For if you exercise good judgment with him and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the root of the eye
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rot occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend into the scrotum, which is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts come out of his belly. After this, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the testicles are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and mark an inch below the rot over the bone of the groin, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with which this is done:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and dripping blood. Then bring the testicles back to their place; and the minister holds his hand so that they do not return again; and well work the groins for the patient, and put a pillow under him and two cushions on the groins, and one more under the feet so he can hold his hands; then put the cautery over the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the testicles do not pop out when you use the cautery, so that you do not burn him; and so that through this the patient does not die, or have other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you should know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And cauteries for children should be smaller according to the size of their ears, and for large people as large as their ears; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter so that the burning is removed; then cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary to let their scrotum hang loose for a long time, so that the testicles do not pop out when they stand up in rooms.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another .40 days; and let him have good rest, work little, and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much loud laughter; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment for cutting into his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	from the disease of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then make a cautery of the cautery depending on its quantity, and burn it a third of the way into the skin; after the treatment, according to what we have said. And some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first sign the spot with ink and draw a line along the edge of the ulcer, and another one above it, and hold your hand firmly over the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, from falling or from being hit, and the pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine doesn't help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtuosity and location of twisting and its pain. If he is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on it, for such is the custom that it must change in the limb that is nearest to it, so you must do cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Miasmas are sometimes aided by cautery with great effect, and so are diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care whether the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not persist or remain, and you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 on the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and he should hold his hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as long as the skin in those places comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and he should be cauterized on the scalp according to what is before him.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it is manifestly lost, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned in the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup, and another one next to it, and two cauteries on the two shoulders; and two cauteries on the armpits, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you should know that the more cauteries you do, the more help and benefit it will bring; and you should know that the sick person does not feel the pain of the cautery as a healthy person does, because their body is already corrupted. And the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, depending on what you find in the ways of the irons. After this, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, yet it does not heal, then one should make cauterizations on the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the outlet of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet one should not attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of poplars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and the color changes; then treat it with a poultice of equal parts of barley flour and lentils, mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the intestines and blood of an almond tree; bind it all together and apply it, keeping it in place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When a ulcer appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery which resembles a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer. And yet the wise say that one should also make cauteries in the middle of the ulcer; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may become inflamed and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more direct method is to cauterize around the edge, using the cautery called "circle", as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal due to either the excess fluid it produces or the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it was formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand over the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has penetrated the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the infection is alleviated. After the cautery has healed completely.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	A different kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is simply a corruption or decay in a limb, for it rots the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cautery tools small and large, according to what is needed in the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you have removed all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that all that is decayed is removed. And then let it rest for three days, and apply ointment made with oil to the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed and all the corruption is gone. After the cautery, use ointments that promote healing. And if you see after three days that new skin has not formed, then restart the cautery on the areas where the decay remains. This decay can sometimes be treated with a medicine called "ague", but cauterization by fire is generally more effective; I have already described how to treat "ague" in the section on diseases: you can look it up when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that appear on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that in the feet by default a disease called "close" according to our intention arises, and it is a large blistered thing that blisters the foot. And the cautery of this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery iron as hot as an owl's feather, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can prop up the claw all around, and that it has thin edges; then put it all hot on the claw, and turn your hand all around the claw until it comes to the bottom of the claw; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to ooze pus; then make him an ointment of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the ointment all night, and the claw will fall off and be uprooted by its roots. Then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by default in the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then you should administer hot water cautery; and it is in such a way: take a brass or iron rod, or an owl's feather, and put it on the claw and the athael, that is to say, warts; and put the rod on so that it purples all around, then put a little bowl of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the claw, and can find the hot water a deep way to the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. So do one after another, until you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you should make four cauteries on their spine, one cautery between each spinous process; and one cautery on the penis, and one over the stomach with an olive-sized cautery; this will cease the trembling and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes they appear as boils, or stinking pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. At their first appearance, one should make a cautery on the tip of each pustule: with a fine twig of myrtle, the point being taken in the fire, or with a long root of aristolochia, or with an lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at their appearance according to this manner, and they cannot grow any larger thereafter, but the surplus from which they come is disrupted and they are healed; but it must be done after bloodletting.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flowings of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very sad thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you must hasten to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it very hard until the blood is quietened beneath your finger and no more drips out; then prepare some olive-wood cauteries, both small and large according to the wound and the location where the artery lies, and place the cautery upon that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding has stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds afresh when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to apply these one after the other until the bleeding has stopped; and beware of hurting the nerve which lies nearby, and causing any other harm to come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stanched merely by itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods which we have described: by cautery, or extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicine placed on top which has the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight binding with cloth or placing hot objects on it, or other similar treatments, will not benefit if only a little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, then he should put his index finger on the wound as we have said, and press hard enough that it is tight on the wound; and he should not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and pressed tight; and he should seek out those who can provide cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization by fire or hot medicines, and their symptoms, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I included in that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will continue in this chapter following the same path so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to be foolhardy. Because there are many types of people who come for treatment: some are so desperate because of their illness that they would easily be led astray by the deception they find in their illness, and because of the great seriousness of their illness; one must fear for them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these there are those who give up their senses and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is stubborn. You should not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but put more trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not open up thoughtlessly but wisely of what you are certain of, and of what you can have possession and enjoy; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your illnesses, to which salvation is converted; and that will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in a conversational manner, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the delivery is too forceful, pressing the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone except children, and in all those I have seen, death was imminent; and because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the treatment in several parts.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer be supported; and the moisture accumulated under the bone between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should split the head widely halfway through; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of the spatulum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head opening from each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not close again; then you must split the head into four parts in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, draw out all moisture firmly. After that, squeeze the cracks with rags and powders, pour in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and poultices, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture so that the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you observe where the aperture of the abscess is, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess is open and the gathering of pus, and make an incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut into the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the best treatment is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them being cut, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area of the vein with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck still with one hand and with another hand tie a bandage around his neck; then look where the vein bleeds, and the spots are behind the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the spots with a cross, then cut both of them with a sharp spatule two parts deep so that the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done from the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatule under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also as deep as two parts across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will continue to spurt upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three digits, then cut in and slice to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is 25 units, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains nothing over the bone, so that pus does not come from an abscess, then extract the wound and ligature it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age dementia comes, and the catarrh is acute, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient madness and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we should extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair from his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens clearly through its beating, and is not very deep-seated except in some people who are too cold; and if it is deep-seated, the patient should stretch his neck backward with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and anoint the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then scorch the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers and cut it well away from the threads that are beneath it in each part; and if the artery is fine, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then bandage that part according to the quantity of the two heads. For if it is not bandaged, the blood will not stop flowing everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood from 1/4 to 3/4 inch; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and there is a slow flow of blood; then cut away the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the head is cut; and this is the best method if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization helps to finish moisture: that is why it is of great help for moistures.Et si li artere fu grans, si covient que tu traies dou sang des  .xij./ et si li artere ne vout pas estourdir, si le remets en son leu et tue li sans par la pointe d’uncine, car il ne peut bien demorer ains.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.Or there is a better method for extracting arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method for extracting arteries: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with bandages until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you work on it, return it to its place and kill it with the tip of the fingernail, for it cannot stay in any other way.And there is a better method: one fills
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less firmly.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have pricked both sides, you must hold the hot iron against them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two at both sides, and they should be spaced so that they are not soldered by this cautery all the way through; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the veins that are on the forehead, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the sick person turn red, and they feel heat in their forehead and trembling all over their body, and their eyelids are swollen and red, and the skin around their eyes is peeling from the heat of their tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And the ancients called it "cure contused", and you should do to the patient who has this disease to the hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as two fingers all over the forehead going down until the nose, and the other two at two sides above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are at the two sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three beans across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	Have ready a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatulum, which is made of two parts of cow horn:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is to be made at the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all of the skin that is between the two incisions up to the skin that is on the bone, then make another incision from the middle incision all the way to the other second one, and then remove this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument that is called  "cultellary", and it is very sharp on one side, and not at all sharp on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the incision towards the chest at an angle, and the lower one towards the bone, and make it as wide as necessary until you reach the median fissure. And tie all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to the aperture in the chest, and then make another incision in the median fissure up to the other aperture; then extract the blood evenly, and express the area for the extracted blood; then place a tent of old cotton in each fissure, and place dampened cloths in wine, oil, and garlic on top, and be careful that no abscesses develop; and after three days loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of cold water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone experiences acute catarrh regularly, and you see their eyes are sunken and small, and their vision weakened, and the eyelids burned, and hair falling out, and pain in the head, and they sneeze; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs come from many veins, and the medicine for it is what I have described.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you should command the patient to lean back, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another from the left temple to the right; the incision should reach the bone. Keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control eating; when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen bandages between the two lips of the cut. Then apply wet rags soaked in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid hot abscesses. When it is removed, you should rub the bone until it starts to grow warm, then treat it with things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colocynthis, and make an ointment from them; then administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	for earache
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or a stone, or something similar like iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans; or something flowing, like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or something else that does not adhere to the ear, nor grow in the ear, hold the ear towards the sun. If you see the pebble, then distil some violet oil or oil of sesame, then administer extraction; and cause him to sneeze with snuff, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards. Often it will come out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, have extraction administered by slender pincers, thus is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out through the pincers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a slender needle of small tubing; and if it does not come out in this way, make an iron hook and push the hook's tip into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for often it will come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take bird glue, and put some on a tool designed for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so that pus comes out, and a spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you can reach the pebble, then extract it according to your ability, and suck on it vigorously with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains which are there and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatulum with a thin needle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin tweezers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the acute condition that affects the ear, the patient should use the first remedy and pack the ear with soft cotton. And he should lie on his side with the affected ear upwards. If the water flows out through the ear, that is good. If not, he should take several thin stones according to the size of his finger, heat them in the fire, and place one end of a stone in his ear and the other end on the ground; and he should press down with his hand so that the water flows out, as we have said for the stone. He should continue doing this with different stones until all the water has come out, just as we have said. Then he should take a stalk of grass, insert one end into the ear, and hold the other end over the fire until the thinnest stalk is burnt; then he should do the same with another stalk until all the water has come out, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the worm, if it is small like a flea or similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest way to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun; if there appear no worms, then pull them out with subtle pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin where the form is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the thinnest end of an instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then suck gently all over the skin; do this frequently until all the worms emerge. And if they don't emerge, then stop up the skin with cotton as I said about stones; and if they don't come out as we have said, then administer distillations which the ancients have tried in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, according to where the form is located, as you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with small holes below and openings above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a brass instrument specially made for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines, into the skin, and let the skin be in the ear; then insert the razor all the way into the cotton, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient feels the medicine inside, and let the distillation be a little warm as it is distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ear; and the same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or wound inside the ear, and sometimes this abscess erupts in the ear, which cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small opening, which can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When it erupts and cannot be seen, it indicates a poor prognosis in many cases, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then it has reached this stage due to the following reasons:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is sharp and pointed in front and behind, without piercing the ear; if the membrane is due to an abscess or the body of the ear, then hold it with tweezers and gently peel it off until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the infection is deep in the ear, take a thin, delicate razor, heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the infection that the sick person feels deeply in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the aperture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriolic stone on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened with cerotum made from rosemary oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and cloth dipped in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment comes in papers when they are moist and dry; you should therefore extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then place powdered vitriol on the site.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not removed by scraping, then cauterize them with a delicate lens-shaped cautery tool, and the cautery after the incision is beneficial; they often reappear when something remains in their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times they come in papers as things that look like hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called 'hailstone'. It is an accumulation of moisture, thick on the paper above and below; the treatment is as follows: if the hailstone does not move from one side to another, and it is a minor issue, then it is easy to understand. Open it with tweezers, then peel it gently from each side; if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, it will not harm the patient. If the tear is large, there should be a stitch, and the wound treated until it is healed; but if it is small, no force should be used, as the ointment will restore it immediately and prevent infection.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hematoma is descending within the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and press it with pincers; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hematoma is pressed, wash the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which causes infection until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinac is a fat which is woven into webs of paper above, and this happens most to children with no people, and it hurts them a lot, and the catarrh comes to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this, they lie on their faces, sleep on top, and have moist eyelids that are swollen and covered by the appearance of the exinac which opens in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exnac coming out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the operation is that the patient puts his head on yours; and then take .i. linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that exnac contains in each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exnac is brought together within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatulum, making it no larger than the wound made for bleeding; and in various dispositions, exnac comes out of the incision according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers and thumb, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphincter muscle up to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the external orifice opens at the beginning of the fissure, gently dilate the opening slightly so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the cloth in vinegar and water, place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are men who grind the area and apply something to corrupt the moisture that remains; then treat it until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the area, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et s’il vient au leu aposteme freddure, si met sus emplaustre chaut tant qu’il est chaud; puis li met sus dous oile, et li cure de bendelz.
des poilz des papieres	And if a cold abscess comes to the area, apply a hot poultice until it is warm; then apply warm oil, and treat it with bandages.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers that are different from nature, and they are enveillit, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to treat this: either by cauterization with fire, or by using a medicine applied directly to the eye, or through incision and suturing, or via canes, depending on what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the affected eye paper towards your left hand; if it is cured, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle with thread through the edge of the paper where the hair is growing, and pierce 1 thread through the upper part of the paper all the way to the edge, then turn the paper over and make an incision in the part under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, up to the sphenoid bone, following the path of the tear duct from the large lachrymal gland to the small one; then remove the thread and place a small tent made of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then draw a figure of eight on the paper, like a myrtle leaf, but the shape should depend on how much you see the divided paper rising.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a need to cut out a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is, then make an incision along the two lines you have marked, starting from the large lachrymal gland up to the small one; and let one of the incisions be close to the normal hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the wound, then cut off all the skin; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch using an aiguille and fine woolen thread, and wipe away any blood, and allow the excess threads on the eyelids to dry for a while if you wish, or else cut them off, then leave the stitches in place for 3-4 days; then treat the wound without stitches using drying and constricting remedies, for the paper will heal quickly once the wound is closed and the edges brought together, but stitches are painful (as the ancients say), and this method is performed without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and it is that you draw the paper in the form of a figure which is like the myrtle leaf, as we have described, with .iiij. notches made according to the shape which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with which to sew up the figure, and take another thread through the large pore, and the second thread through the small one, and bring the threads together between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have signed, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and sometimes the hair of the paper is reversed; so you should use what we have said about the incision, but the suturing in one and the other is more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of warts is as follows: convert the parchment and insert it according to what I have said, then make two warts by skill, and two fine threads as long as the width of the sputum and the broad part; then tie two threads at both ends where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other skillfully above what is on top of the parchment of the eye, and strain the two warts from the two formed parts; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrivel up and fall off when it dries.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow to heal, then treat the wart until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the parchment lifted, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two warts that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the work is such that you prick with a fine needle, and thread it with a fine and soft silk thread; then assemble the threads and tie them skillfully, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then prepare in the case a fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head into your hand; and let it be in the sun so that the work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute work, then pierce the needle all the way through the parchment to the root of the hair, and draw it out through the parchment until it comes out with the natural hair; then thread the hair into the case, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out through the case with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then treat the wound underneath all the way to the root that you have assigned to it, until the wound comes out from above the opening and you see it through the eye; then treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, then accompany one long hair of the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one you leave it, until it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eye's pus
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called 'alacrity' or the pus comes in the eye, there are two ways it happens: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to treat it is that you split that soudure, and loosen its eyelids, and put in it tents of linen, and dress it until it is healed; and one must not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than before; but one should use soft things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded, and daiquilon ointment melted in some of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these works which we have said are not remedies for this disease, but preventions so that it does not return to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which lies beneath the skin is truly called "axacrati", and it has natural and accidental causes. The accident comes from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle with .i. double thread, pierce the flesh at the outer corner of the eye so that the thread passes through both eyelids, then tie the thread tightly so that the eye is pulled up and the eyelid is opened wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the papery returns to what it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the slit, turn the paper over, and cut  .ij. slits along the sides within the paper; let the corners of the  .ij. slits where you inserted the thread be at  .i. angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter with the name " .j. griesche"; then remove the thread, according to the quantity that his sides are cut underneath, then attach the two separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a split or a stitch or cautery, then one should make a plain slit underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare remedies with all their might, so that they may bring the figure back to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is needed in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to the scalp in such a way that the scalp above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then one should insert the tip of a razor underneath the scalp, and lift it upward; and press it with tweezers, until you grab what is cut into the spatulum, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear the pain of the too-sharp spatulum cutting into the eye; and your incision, by which you peel back this membrane, should be light, so that the scalp returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly is healed, and they sometimes produce a saline solution in the eye, and raise it with sweet water, and use a bandage; then place a tent made of linen between the scalp and the eye, and place soft wool soaked in egg yolk on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the ointment and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst, and another which is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture; when touched by iron and pinched with tweezers, neither can be removed. Both appearances begin at the large tear duct, growing little by little until they cover the entire eye and its sight and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient tilts his head toward you, then he opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with tweezers and pull it up slightly; then take a needle and thread through a horse, cow or ox hair, and double the end of the needle over, then pierce the nail with the entire needle, and tie the nail with a string and tie it above, then scrape all along the side of the nail where the tear duct is, up to the eyebrow, leaving the natural skin around the tear duct, so that by the incision the tears do not come out as usual; sometimes the nail is just stuck on the needle and thread, as we have said; then scrape it off all along the tear duct gently and with small movements.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the tear duct does not touch the thread and break it, and that the eyelid is not pierced; after the incision, put a little powdered chalk in the eye, and make a collar of litargir, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved and you cannot push in the needle and the hook cannot enter, this kind of nail is often cured by medicines; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the disease, and take the spatulum gently punctured according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And draw the nail gently, and if you see that it is not lessened and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper and powdered chalk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same action, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye greatly, then suspend it on the hook, and cut off a part but not all so that the body of tears does not come in; then distill into the eye red collar made from litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows over the eyeball, covering it and pressing down on the eyelids, and it looks like a rosebud; then the patient puts his head into your lap, and you work on the eye, and cut away all the flesh with suitable scissors, and hold it in place firmly; then cut away the first piece of flesh, and continue cutting carefully until it is all removed, being careful not to cut the eyeball while working on it. The incision should be made with a spatulum as described for the incision on a fingernail, using gentle force to remove the flesh, as demonstrated in this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Once the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, apply eye salve made of linseed oil mixed with red vitriol and other corrosive medicines; then cover the eye with a pad soaked in egg white to protect it from hot abscesses. If nothing remains, and the warm abscess becomes cold, and you still doubt that there is an abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with cooling remedies. Then return to your work on the eye until it is healed, and do the same for any other eyes with similar problems.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should also know how to treat weak eyes by the natural way, and with surgery for accidental injuries; and do not insert your fingers in any of these procedures until you see that this member is suffering from that procedure.
des voines des eulz	of veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red veins that are covered above the eye, and tolerate vision and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, first, you must examine the eye, because if it is in such a state, it is out, and there is no other disease except the red vein; then treat it in this way: instruct the patient to lower their head into your lap, then gently squeeze those veins at the edge according to his judgment, and let the edges be double according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two edges be gradual in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then treat the veins firmly, and draw out the blood drop by drop after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to bruise the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not touch the veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to pull out all of them in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this method which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor should also examine the 'arissati' fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, if it is not healed, then there must be a cut made over the abscess where it should remain, and all the moisture within must be drawn out until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then it is necessary to use this instrument; and it is called an 'aspre chief', and it must be made from a very hard substance, with one end pointed like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while until you know that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the site is sewn up and there is no swelling and the body of the bow is sewn up and remains so for 40 days, and it does not open and no evil occurs, you know that it has healed; if not, then you must simply open the fistula at its opening with a knife according to this form: you uncover the bone a second time with an iron and with watery medications, and when it is uncovered, take up .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be pointed, and let the staff be thinned down to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone over the ulcer, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then bring back the whole forest until it pierces the bone and he feels it through his finger; then restore the site with dry medications as I have taught you, and when the scabs come out and harden the site, wash the matter off at the finger; this is an easier thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the output of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open all around and do not disturb the nose or cause thinning, then you should ligate the patient; then cleanse the eye, then place leeches or suckers without piercing to draw out fluid; then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla onto the eye; then tightly bind the eye with bandages and linen; the method for the linen is that you take quite soft linen, double each piece in four, then place one on top of the other according to how much the eye needs; then tightly bind it from above with a sturdy bandage, and repeat the leeches without piercing to draw out fluid; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature becomes loose, you should re-bind it tightly; then remove the ligature after one day and one night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the poultice, bandages, ligature, and leeches until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a tear occurs in woven fabric, it opens and reveals something like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you thread a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then thread another needle with a double thread through the part of the tear; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric tightly, then pull out the needle and place wet woolen cloth on the eye; and leave it until the threads tear with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric on each side in a circle of cloth, until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a thin spatulum which comes from the bottom of the eye, and scrape away the white moisture and bring the eyes down, and enter in immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the corner of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but an inflammation which gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the appearance of its treatment is that you make the patient sit upright and still, then take his head in your hands from both sides and move him until you see the corner of the eye coming to the front of your eyes; then let it settle there, and don't let the light go away and have the patient see things as he used to; and if it doesn't go under, know that it is water, and if the corner of the eye isn't appearing as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatulum and press on the surface of the cornea with the conjunctiva and the corona until the water comes out; and when it is discharged, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled and honey, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearances of the diseases in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so as not to be affected by the sun, and tie up the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper over the eye, on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument alongside the crown by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye to the point where the tear duct is smallest, then push the instrument called 'almagda' skillfully, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the white of the eye, and feel that 'almagda' comes into the empty space; and the measure of the path of 'almagda' should be at the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horn-like tissue, and then place the instrument where the aqueous humor is, then express it beneath one pathway after another. If the aqueous humor flows out now, the patient can see in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, if the aqueous humor flows back up the second pathway, push it down with the instrument, and when it is firmly lodged and does not flow up again, gently remove 'almagda' by turning your hand a little; then put in a little more sealed oil gem, and leave it in the eye. Then place a soaked cotton or wool pad in rose oil and egg white on top of the eye, and tie it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, apply crushed comfrey with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then put in almond milk, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark room where he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and keep him still from all movements, and give him light food, and do not let him move his head or to the right or to the left, and tie him according to his condition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it, so that the water rises gently.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And if a hot abscess comes, you must untie the eye before the seventh day, and use what soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, untie the sight and put on an eyelid cover to cover one eye, and then stay in that dark room. And then leave the house little by little, and return to his normal state; and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they pierce and put almond milk into it, so that water is drawn out, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps this is a new thing.Et s’il vient a l’oil que le tenebros ne peut estre remedeiz par nullis de cestz chapitrez, que tu deslie la veue et la metes en son leu, car il ne se pourait mie remedeer.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the shapes of almagest , because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly of iron:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of the needles have this same subtlety, and the hindmost are pointed in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the eye through the nostril
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Sometimes, there are various types of growths that emerge from the nostrils, some of which resemble scorpions with multiple legs; and among these, there are those with a dark-colored swelling, and others with a light-colored lump. Therefore, for the latter type of growth, you should make the patient stand facing the sun, pinch his nose shut, pour the medication onto the growth, and pull it outwards; then, as far as you can endure it, use a delicate needle to pierce the growth from one side, until you are sure that the entire growth has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing which we cannot cover, then open it at all .i. of the subtle instruments slightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you are overwhelmed, or abscess bad, then dry it as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stained and all the flesh is removed, then pour or neat's milk and water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And if the ear works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, because the instruments do not come to cut: therefore you must put into the ear a thread of linen about half a finger thick, and let it hang from the hand, and have between each knot a distance of one or two fingers; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his mouth with all his strength, and draw it through until it comes out through the nose; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and pull them gently towards you alternately while holding them steady. Do this until you know that the thread has corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the ear as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh; and then put a plug of pitch in the nose for a few days until it is healthy, and if medicine is needed to dry it, then use it. This is the form of the instrument to clean the ear, with which one distils oils and medicines into the ear.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and it should have a handle to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid. And if you wish, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be hollow to clean out the ear; and have a plug in the ear to hold it while heating the oil or other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the tip of the nose; it grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should cut it at the beginning and remove all the pus; then apply fire cautery or burning medicine. If you delay cutting it until it becomes large, take care that it is not hard, of dark color, or insensate: do not touch it with iron, for this is a deep abscess. For when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient. If the abscess is due to touch and not to dark color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then empty the wound and cut it without fear, cleansing the area of dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should know that when pus comes from a broken cartilage, it does little good in some people. Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, you should examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then bring together the .ij. lips with one stitch, then cleanse it until it heals. If the lips are dislocated on both sides, you should scorch all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring together the .ij. lips with a stitch, tighten them, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense; place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, leave it to dry by itself, then cleanse it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you prepare the thread: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with a thread, as I have already informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, there are hard abscesses inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller and larger; therefore, you must twist the lips, and slit them at each end, then grab them with tweezers and cut into each part; then apply vitriated quicklime to the incision until the blood is stanched; and then leave it with garlic, and treat the area with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus run out; then apply powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, over the site. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery, that is how you treat an abscess.
des sordens	from filth
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are growths at the base of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, which are unsightly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, due to corruption in the gums, and they smell bad; you should make the patient hold his jaw open and expose the teeth or gums, removing everything until it is clean; and thus you should treat blackness, yellowness, greenness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned. If what was removed at first returns, it is good; if not, then do it again the next day and the day after, until everything is removed. Know that teeth require various types of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the job shows you, so that the instruments used to clean between the teeth have different forms from those used to clean the gums; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay pulling the tooth only as long as you can, because it should not be done; for it is a very serious matter to pull a tooth without cause.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain about the tooth. Many times, the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in the good tooth, and pulls out the good tooth; and yet the pain does not go away because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already wanted to do this to these patients. And when you are certain about the tooth, you must scrape around the tooth all around strongly to push back the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or with small tweezers into the first pocket and pocket, until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers firmly. And let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Then pull out the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it slightly into each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with cotton, where the holes are; and then hold it firmly with tweezers so that it does not break when pulling; and you must work very gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and bring back greater pain to the patient through the malice of the root than before. And beware that you do not do as the ignorant surgeons do, who often in their haste and arrogance break the tooth, and do not pay attention to what we have said; but sometimes they bring great illness through the holes made by the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or garlic and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which make the teeth loose first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to grip the roots.
de la racine des dens	of the tooth roots
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains during pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days, until the gums are softened. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which make the gums look like a doctor's beak. They should be made inside like a file, and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, you must uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", that is, a spatula, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	Let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through it, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, whose shapes come later:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one can also use this instrument with .ij. fingers, whose shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are in front of the reason for the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Let this instrument be so strong that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise, subtle master finds his own instrument according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are many illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the variety of causes. And if it does not break in the bone or in any of the other bones, but protrudes, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, by which these are the forms:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with suitable medicines. And if there is a protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When a tooth appears not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is an air pocket with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a pointed end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And tap it gently day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be ground down, then grind it with a file like this, in the shape shown:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the lime that needles are made from; and with lime gently prick the tooth little by little day after day, so that it does not move until it falls out; then smooth it completely at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the front teeth loosen, by a blow or falling, and the patient cannot chew without spitting it out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines without success; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves; and the wire should not be too thin or too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to direct the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice around the two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth in between, whether there is one or more, so that you reach the bleeding to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then start covering again from where you began, and pull your hand gently and firmly, so that it does not move; and the ligature should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then twist the wire with pliers, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth and the loose one, so that it does not cut the tongue; and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the wire breaks, then restrain it with another wire. It will stay like this all his life, and this is the shape of the teeth and the form of how to direct the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, if one is put in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from a cow's bone, and it is put in the place where there is a defect, and it is restrained as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	cut off the hair of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	At times this ligament comes from under the tongue as a birth defect, or it can result from an abscessed wound. The treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, tilt their head back, and lift up the tongue. Then cut the thick nervous ligament, making sure that the tongue is loosened from its socket. If there is any hardening due to an abscess, cut it open and treat the wound. Be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery underneath. Once you're finished, raise the affected area with a poultice of rosewater and garlic, or with cold water. Then place a tent made of linen under the tongue, and every night apply a blistering agent to the wound so that it doesn't heal closed. If there is any bleeding, apply crushed vitriol; if not, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Once the wound is healed, treat it with other treatments as needed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is black or hard and the patient doesn't feel any pain, then don't touch it, as it is likely a cancerous growth. If it is declining towards a blister and there is moisture, pierce it with a needle and release the fluid with a gentle spatulum, opening it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your intervention, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until all the pus is drained. Raise the affected area with poultices of garlic and salt, and treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes bumps called "godath" appear in the throat, and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as described in the section on tonsillitis, and they do not heal, be careful: if they are hard abscesses of small size and a dark color, do not touch them with iron. If they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron either, to prevent bleeding; but let them be until they rupture on their own. If they are white and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for cauterization, but first check that the abscesses have subsided and are calm. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head tilted back, and the surgeon holding a piece of cloth between his teeth and pressing the tongue down under the instrument, which should be made of silver or thin brass like a small knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then press the tongue down with the instrument and you will see the abscess. Take a pair of tweezers and grab it, pulling it out of the tonsil and up towards the surface as far as possible; pull some threads from the cloth along with it, then cover the instrument again, which should be shaped like a hook, to create a grip, and is made of either iron or copper.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument available, use tweezers, which should be shaped like a hook:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it has a sharp point on one end and a flat edge on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils appear in the throat, so cut them thus as the two tonsils are cut.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like that for one or two more days. And the abscesses had risen up so much that they had pushed two teeth out of their sockets. I hurried therefore at once, and made an incision in one of the openings, then removed a large amount of pus; then I made another cut in the other opening of the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the knife into the abscesses, and cut out part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the throat of the woman was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I packed it with a poultice and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it stopped growing. And I left those parts, and did not know what happened to her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the lens has descended into the pupil, and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round beneath, then it is called an "uve." When it has been cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the coat of the abscess is pacified, and it is thin; and it is round and not long; and it is blood-red or yellow or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the pupil, and draw it underneath, and cope with it using one of the two instruments which I mentioned for the incision of the two almond-shaped areas. And you must not cope beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it will harm his voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almond-shapes, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient fears having it copped, then you should use a cautery on him without fear. The manner of cauterization is as follows: The patient puts his head on your healthy shoulder, and then presses his tongue against the instrument which we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and applies it with live coals so that they are not too thick or too hot; and use the tip of this instrument, whose shape is thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a handle on its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the pupil; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine run out of his mouth and do not go down into his throat and lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the pupil for the duration of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medicine are pacified. And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton on top, so that the cotton sticks to the pupil; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and remove it after four or five days. And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, then renew it, and after the cautery, wash around the pupil with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use a cold compress, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and in the pot there is one instrument with a handle shaped thus:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And be of silver or bronze, and put one of the heads into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; after that, repeat often, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, for many things happen then; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put inside it an egg-shell, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell will not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine, or some object, gets stuck in the throat; so you must try to remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with the whole instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not come out and is lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the spot, it will lodge there, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and let the head be raised upward; and beware of touching the epiglottis, lest it be torn, nor push the bone in; and move the patient's head so that he vomits, in order to dislodge the object; then he swallows the instrument, so that he can dislodge the object; if he cannot swallow it, then pull it out with the whole instrument, equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Sometimes the saliva is treated with medicine, as I have said in the classification, by applying remedies; and if this does not help, then examine the throat of the patient facing the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument I told you about. And if you see the saliva, pull it out with a small hook, or use fine tweezers that are suitable for this purpose. If this doesn't work, take a long needle and put it in the patient's throat, then heat the needle, and do this frequently. If the patient has a fever all day, take a glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, moving his jaw often; as soon as the saliva feels the water, it will come out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it doesn't work as we have said, then smoke the patient's throat with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking the throat; do this many times, because it will work without delay. The method of smoking is to place burning charcoal in a pot with a perforated lid, and insert the tip of the instrument through the hole; then blow your smoke into the instrument, and have the patient put the needle in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the saliva; the saliva will come out now, and if it doesn't work, then repeat the smoking many times. Let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted and sour foods, and drink no water; and then he will need to urinate.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to pull the saliva is, when you can see it, similar to curved tweezers that can enter the throat; it should be shaped like a surgeon's forceps, with roughness from lime so that it can grasp and not let go; here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many types of abscesses, depending on their appearance, as the recollections in this book from various sources show, and they differ in how they are punctured and in their size. They occur in two ways: either according to their appearance or according to the location in the body. An abscess in the head is different from one in the fundament, and an abscess in fleshy tissue is different from one that occurs in joints, and each requires a different treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And in some abscesses, one must not puncture them until the pus is mature according to its completion; and there are some that one must puncture when they are mature, or they will not complete their digestion, as with those near joints. For when an abscess occurs near a joint, if you let it become purulent all around, the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal organ, if you delay piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal organ; or if it is near the fundament, one must pierce it so that it may mature; and one should not puncture a mature abscess before its digestion is complete, except for those near the fundament, which may become purulent and prolonged inside without causing fistula, and will heal in a reasonable time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one should know the time of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its digestion, and it is when the pain has subsided, and the decrease in fever, and the lessening of swelling and redness, and the improvement in appetite and the appearance of pus; and one must pierce where the abscess is most dependent, and where there are signs of pus forming. And the piercing should be at a distance from the heart, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no folding of the skin.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	Here, [you should] treat according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is best that you leave the puncture until it is fully healed and digested, as we have said. For if you pierce it earlier, it will lengthen the body from which the venom comes, and it will fill with filth; and the lips and depths of it may harden. And for some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And one should treat small abscesses with small punctures, and large abscesses with large punctures, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where one must pierce the heart, and cover it when it has become like a drape, and is deadened, one should do as one does with blisters. And there are some that are split into three angles, and some which are covered like the leaf of a bay tree, as with abscesses of the fingernails; and some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those without a head, such as a superficial abscess, should be punctured directly; and when the abscess is large and has drawn a great deal of pus, one should not draw out all the pus at once, but only a portion; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more pus; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out. This is especially important if the patient is weak, a woman, a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the pus will spurt out with the opening of the abscess and the patient may die from it without your realizing it. So be very cautious with this chapter; after you have punctured your abscess, wash the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small. If it is a plain incision, dress it with tents made of linen or old cotton; if it is a large abscess with many punctures, you should stuff each puncture with a tent so that they press against one another. If you have cut into the skin of the abscess and spread it open, then fill it with dry cotton or a lining of a linen dress without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is bleeding from your work, then apply cold water and vinegar, and moisten a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding continues, apply a regime and treatment, and the powders I have described earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the area is very nervous, then you should place moistened tents and cloths that have been warmed in wine and hot oil over the area. If it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then moisten the cloths with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.Et se li apostemes est en leu nervouseux, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz em aigue et vin, et oile, et l’eschaude, et ponses par maintes fois; et se c’est ou tens de l’iver, si mets sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en aigue chaude, et en vin chaut, et en oile; et se li leus est charnu, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz em aigue et vin froit, et en oile, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit.  Et puis deslie l’aposteme, et essue la plaie, et cure, si com il covient; et se li bowe est mout grant, si traie tentes derechief; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement, si com il covient tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And so it is necessary to understand generally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one must go about treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Or of the head come small abscesses, and they are like those of people who are in cloth, like the jowls of a guinea-hen, and there are many similar ones. Some are fatty and some have pus; and there are some that are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery doesn't cause problems. The action of the jaw is such that you should test all instruments, called 'entromissoires', from which the form comes, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then draw it out from above the long bone. And when the moisture has been drained, then scrape off the skin that contains the moisture, for it will heal as it dries; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and apply this to the wound and leave it until the next day, and then repeat with the cotton as before on the second and third days, until you are sure that it no longer contains any moisture; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it heals. And if the abscess contains a hard knot, cut it according to the following form from above, and gouge out its roots, and scrape away all around it, and apply all your treatment to drawing out the pus from under the coat in which it lies; and if the artery causes problems, then do as I told you later. And also do this for an abscess that is stony, in terms of texture, and in terms of treating it, just as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incision on a moist and stony abscess is easier, for they contain little blood. And there are some abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and among these was one that I opened on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a pebble, rough and white, and could not be broken up; if anyone had cut it, they would have caused a wound like a stone. Other abscesses coming on the head, before those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be made as low as possible so that the pus can flow out; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are numerous, and are interconnected with each other. Each scrofula is properly located within its coat, as we have said for the vein and the abscess of the head; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and will not respond to treatment. So when you see one that has a good disposition, and resembles the color of the body, and is flat on each side, and is not adherent to the nerves of the neck, nor to the artery or duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and scrape away the skin from every part, and if necessary, you should use the two lips of the heart as we have described for abscesses in the head. Then gently pull it out bit by bit, being careful not to cut any nerve or vein, nor let the spatulum dig too deeply, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far ahead, so you don't cut anything you shouldn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you work on it, then put in the wound powdered glass, or some powder that stops bleeding, and tie off the wound; and leave it until the abscess is resolved, and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, until you have finished it; then seek with your finger if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, then do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it hang by that; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you scrape all the scrofula, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, since there is no longer any surplus due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should attend to covering the root of it, pulling it out and stitching as we have said. For those scrofulae that hold a surplus, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as the one previously mentioned, hanging a tent with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment mixed with charcoal until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of cutting the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the written account of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with scrofula, it is necessary to cut the throat, which is called the "epiglottis"; and one should not make an incision through this, because all the veins and the lungs are affected by the disease in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we must split it below three or four circles, or a small slit across, between two circles, or according to the amount of the slit in the soft palate; not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places where it is suitable to split the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to the entire opening, then split the soft palate as far as the uvula; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the soft palate as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel of the finger which jumped out through the place which is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and heal it all along without the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote healing, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, press on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passes in 3 or 4 days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young maiden take .i. knife and stab herself in the throat, slicing through some of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood had not come out through the throat or windpipe but instead was escaping through the wound itself.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound, healing her as best I could;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and had not the maid been bled, and returned after to her natural state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of ash, and it occurs mostly in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; where nature has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident happens in two ways, one of which is similar to a boil that comes out of our veins, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and one should not operate with force unless in the smallest part, and test and examine throughout the entire opening:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it like a boil, and cannot push through at all, then cut it as one cuts a boil, and treat it throughout its entire depth, if there is nothing inside;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and surround it well, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe in detail.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is hot and feverish, as long as the boil has not passed, and the pus is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the nose, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a sinus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are according to their appearances, either greasy or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the nose, you should first test and examine it with an instrument called an "introducer", according to what its shape comes from in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to press on the dampest spot you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers this way and that, until you feel the instrument has penetrated the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then withdraw the trocar, and be careful in case it jumps out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the flowing pus is clear, whatever color it has, treat it as I have described for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the trocar no pus comes out, know that it is dense, so treat it in the shape of a cross, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape off the crust on each side and guard the wound where it lies so you draw it clean with the needle;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if some remains and the pain troubles you, then employ corrosive powders on the wound, and constrict the wound, and apply hot ointments for abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the .10. lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein pulsating is contrary or other, you hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the spot, and leave it for 2 days or 3, until the wound suppurates, and the blood flow subsides; then return to cover what has remained of the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the probing instruments, which come in 3 varieties: large, medium and small; and there are 3 squares, which are called 'albaret', and 1 that is called 'breb', and there are of 3 kinds: large, medium and small, for surrounding abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are also like the needles used to sew sorcerers' charms, and are made of brass, iron or silver, and those that are yellow are best, and are more proven with black pitch for surrounding the channels of fistula;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and there are 3 kinds: large, medium and small, depending on the size of the opening of the fistula.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of warts are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are warts that have two curves in three ways as well.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and some warts that have three curves and are in three places as well; and some warts that have two curves, and are only in one place, but in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The main ones that are cut are sharp, and there are some that only cut on one side, so that the vein or nerve is not cut;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these intrusions are placed in wounds, so that the patient does not perceive it when opening abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you can see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the shape of a pair of forceps, according to this form, with which blood is stanched:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed in the place that heals by filling the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are filled according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At times the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen; and if anyone wants to cure them, they should treat them according to the form given in this chapter from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat and clean the wound with a cauterizing agent, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches and let it heal;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the breast shrinks and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, then cut it in two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds the other at their end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line [b] up to the line [g].
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it remain until it dissolves the remnants and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula and they have nodules, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the content of the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with suitable ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofula, then treat them as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn shut, then abscesses often form, and likewise the vein swells and becomes abscessed.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows this is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel a dislocation; and when it is in the vein, there is a visible swelling;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and on the arms and neck, and in many other places; it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid the use of iron, and that which is at the head, one should also avoid, and in that which is inflammation of an artery, they should cut through the skin from above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then perform the incision with a scalpel, and carefully cut the artery from the threads, so that it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then put a needle underneath it, and pierce it all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in .ii. places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the .ii. arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then pierce the place between the .ii. threads of an instrument so that the pus comes out and the abscess is relieved;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment that causes bleeding, until the thread comes undone;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then you must hold in your hand as much of the pus from the abscess to the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand and pierce it, and use a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then ligate the abscess, as I told you, on one of its two sides with the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will hold, insert another needle through the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then lance the abscess until the pus issues forth, then lance the superficiality of the chest and leave what is attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on it a moist bandage soaked in wine and oil, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they also come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in the shoulders and in the hips, and everywhere there are joints, and it is a deep abscess, and its colour resembles the colour of the body, and in many places it has no pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the surface of the body but deep inside.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it is silent in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, down or up, and for those who are in joints, one should not use a hot iron, lest there be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And for those who are on the head or forehead, they should apply the spatumile to the skin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, they suspend it with a hook, then cut it open and remove the bone, and sew up the wound to heal it.
des grosses boces pendans	of large, hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to oats, and it has a subtle root and the scabs are thick. There are small ones and very large ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were split open, and moisture was flowing out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I examined them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; and the treatment for this is to look if the swelling is moist, and if the color of the joint is white and moist with a thin root,
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if the wound is large and deep, and if the blood flows freely, then hurry to use the cautery. For often in deep wounds there are great flowings of blood, and if it flows away, then quickly use the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient terrified and fearful of the cut with the knife, then take a well-made thread and tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to twist the thread of the finger until it dislocates the joint, and piece by piece without effort; and if the roots are large, then have fear in dislocating it for the belly, but you can certainly dislocate half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to dislocate the testicle which is of a dusky color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or a fissure in the syphilis, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it pops out, and then returns in, and sometimes it is dried up, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is from moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrict at all; and if it is from blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to windiness, then there is swelling in the area, and the treatment is to look at whether the appearance is caused by blood from an artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary to let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowel, then you must instruct the patient to hold his breath and be completely still, then sign all around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to lie down quickly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the area you have marked for the entire spasm.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then cut through the top half of the abscess to the large nail;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a strong silk string, and let the patient fasten it himself;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open the top half of the extended abscess over the string, and push your finger in, and feel for the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it stuck to the intestine, loosen it and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the gallbladder, take it at its base and cut away the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein causes resistance, then go around it carefully and return to your work. Take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and insert the needles where you made the cross-shaped incision.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then, pull the abscess in four directions using the needles, and if you can, remove the needles and let the area drain until it is clean. Scrape away any dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or cut it when it is small and tender, then treat the wound as needed, and lance the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed and bind it up.
dou chancre	for sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the types of sores and how to treat them with medicine, including cauterization with iron; now we shall speak of sores appearing in the throat, and great care is needed in their treatment. Ancient scholars say that when sores appear in places where they can be reached by scraping, such as on the nipples, thighs, or other similar areas, they should be completely removed at their onset. However, once they become large and chronic, one should not attempt to treat them, for I have never seen anyone healed from such sores, nor has anyone ever been healed from them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has manifest fullness; then prepare the site for the operation; then shave the area around the ulcer and the head of the wound, and the bone all around without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and squeeze well the site with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel uncomfortable, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, as well as the signs of each type of dropsy, and the treatment through medicine and surgery. Now we will focus on the latter; you should not use surgery for two types of dropsy: tympany and hydroperitoneum, as these are very dangerous conditions. So, if you are treating a patient with dropsy that is called "eclites," and medication does not help, then consider whether the patient is weak or has other ailments besides dropsy, such as digestive issues and similar conditions; in such cases, do not use surgery, as there is a risk of complications. However, if the patient is strong and their only issue is dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you may proceed with the following surgical treatment:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Take the patient by the right hand and press his belly to force out the urine into the lowest part of the penis. Then take a spatulum according to this form: It should be pointed at both ends, but not so narrow that it can enter all the way to the intestines when inserted, nor so wide that it can cause bleeding.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then examine if the hydropsy is in the intestines: You should split beneath the navel on the right side three fingers' width deep. If it's due to liver disease, then the split should be on the left side three fingers' width deep; and if it's due to the spleen, then on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the way through to the instrument, and stop up the urethra, and pull your hand away from the spatulum in between the skin and the glans, as if skinning to the thickness of a fingernail or nail; then pierce the glans until the spatulum reaches the desired depth, and that is the location of the hydropsy. Then pull it out and stop up this instrument which is like a small silver needle, made of brass or light bronze, with a small hole on the underside; three holes on one side, two on the other, and one on the opposite side; the tip is shaped like a feather, and that is the form of the incision from which scribes cut feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the head of this instrument is the alemele, so that when the instruments come to water, they now descend upon the instrument; empty therefore half or one third part, for if you empty more than is fitting in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit through the weapon, or he will faint away, or he will approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malady indicate, and his pulses; then withdraw the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the heart that blocks the orifice that is above the syphus, of which I have spoken, which you pierce in this manner; then renew the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do this on one day, and beware of following it up until there remains but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave in much water, then use the cure of sepulture or hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and drink no wine; and the cure of medicines that are drying, as far as he is healed, and cauterize upon the stomach and upon the liver and upon the spleen after the drawing off of the water, just as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small opening, or it is not in its place. In this case, he must immediately pierce it with a very thin spatulum according to this shape: then put into the opening a very thin piece of lead, and tie it and hold it there for three or four days; and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it. And perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out will not let it close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose opening is small, if they are treated with the lead plug as we have said, will be enlarged. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are troubled, for some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, and because of this they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head and glans of the penis are raised up like a feather, as thick as a pen, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs there, and if it does, stanch the flow with something that stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albata occurs on the penis, and it is an ugly-looking growth; there are both malignant and non-malignant types; therefore you must take them with a small, sharp knife, cut them and clean them all, then put wet cotton in Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with thin ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the albata is malignant, of a pus color and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery. When you have cut it, and if the albata is in the head of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the albata that is inside; and when it is healed, cure the outside. For if you cure them together, the penis will not be secure from being pierced, and blackness and corruption will come in its head and testicles; so cut away all that is black and rotten, then apply ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and rosebuds, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the albata is in the penis and cannot be removed from the skin, then cut it and cure with ointment of wax and pomegranate bark and rosebuds and flour, and anoint the albata with honey; then apply cautery, and it will be healed.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is difficult to treat this, you should cut into it with a spatumile at the tip of the penis and scrotum; then gently pull apart, and place a fine wet linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a matter of continence like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act of our own will, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest cut for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their infants, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcision all around the foreskin, some forcefully, and on all new borns; thus, the head of the penis would become inflamed as there are two membranes, and by chance one gets pushed upwards while the other remains underneath.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they cover it again, and the pain becomes doubled, and at the purification which is done on the foreskin isn't secured the tip of the member; and at the purification of the nail sometimes the cautery slips and ruins the work, and many times they are born such that they don't need purification, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification that is done forcefully all around the thread of hair, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all around the thread; but let the thread be well wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then let him move it in every way he can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then have him stand upright between your hands, and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see it, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and breathe or blow on the heart, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it underneath from .i. to another string; and hold it at .ij. for the second time at the pouch and at the index finger, and press between the .ij. strings, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the muedres; and put powder on top of the powder 1. a piece of cloth glued with a half-cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked with good and fresh rose oil, and let it stay until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for purification is as follows: both heads should be tense and pointed, and the heads should be as large as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the pus within the incision has dried up; therefore, you must extend it with your nail, so that the pus forms an abscess; and then cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with tweezers and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and that which is beneath the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are healed and the skin slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, heal the area of the wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts too deeply into the skin, and it goes above, it will not harm him; therefore, heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a growth, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released and you see that it is retained due to a stone that is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over at the knees, with his feet placed on his back, and he should stretch his abdomen from above his back, and restrain himself as much as he can; this will force the neck of the bladder upwards, causing the expression of the stone and the release of urine.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should use a device called a 'syringe', of which this is the form: it should be made of thin silver, light as an owl's feather; the tube should be a palm and a half in length, with a thin nozzle at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way to make the urine pass is that you take a double thread, and tie to the end of it a little ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and squeeze out the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or lard and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis so that it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis downward toward the scrotum; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and you will feel the patient's urine flow into the empty vessel, but if this is not done according to this order, because the conductor where it goes is twisted, then pull out the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine will follow the wool, then withdraw it outward, and make the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and use the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and be careful of the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine distilling, then do this to all of the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it is formed:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has 3 openings: 2 on one side and 1 on the other, as you can see; and the end through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the tube well without any addition, so that one may draw out moisture and push it in when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the end of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out through the tube that is there; then push the tube firmly in again; then the moisture will enter the catheter and go into the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: it is made like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and below there is .i. breast or the .ij. breasts meet; then take a lamb's bladder and put in the moisture which you see is clotting the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts with a double thread, and heat .i. pot of this moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the catheter into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has gone in comfortably, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make 1 circle out of it, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction, along with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the urethra, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one should operate on cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine exits from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and it opens up like an onion, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks again; and many of these stones cause a fundament; and the healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is intermediate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is appropriate first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines. For they sometimes obstruct the retrieval of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him around, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the top; then let him sit between your hands which are prepared, and his hands are under his thighs, so that his bladder is completely tilted downward; then you probe and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut it with a knife. And if it does not come out with touching alone, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or with your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into his anus, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, push it towards the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and cut where you feel the need to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his fingers up with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin under the testicles in the area where one performs the incision; then he fills the spatulum, which is the mold.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but along the left side of the navel; and it should be straight over the stone, and both testicles should be pressed against the anus, and the incision should be diagonal so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Perhaps it will press the testicle that is against the anus so that it pops out without effort; and you should know that there is stone which has angles and edges: one type grinds its way out; and there is another which is under, similar to a grape, and round, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	For that one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not pop out, then you must pull it out with tweezers which are like a file at the tip, to pull out the stone so that it doesn't slip away; or you fill under it a very thin instrument, and if you cannot catch it that way, then widen the opening a little, and if the blood is exposed, then stop it with vitriole;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	if there is more than one stone, then plug the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then press upwards, then draw it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to draw it out, or break it up with forceps, until you have drawn it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it, and put on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bandage the patient over his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses and blood clots come in the wound and congestion of blood in the bladder, and it is retained so that the urine does not pass out easily with the urine: then press your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with salt and vinegar and oil, and help it in every way you know how until it is healed; and whenever you treat it during the day, tie the two thighs together and apply the medicine to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, causing urination to be blocked; then the treatment I described above is sufficient, even if you have to cut him many times, as I have experienced myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron needle with three pointed ends and insert it into a hot brand:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the needle into the urethra gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the needle in the stone with your hand little by little, until you pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the urethra. As soon as it breaks, it will come out with the urine and the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that defies it, tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then make the wand straight on the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women's bodies, and if it does, the cure is difficult due to three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled female healer who can be trusted, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	The third reason is that one cannot find a skilled female healer in the art of medicine; and the fourth is that women's stones are often deeper than men's, so a deeper incision is required, and there is great fear involved.Et il est grant diference entre li piere des homes et de la femme: car li piere de l’ome si est en leu plus fenestrez et plus pluzible a trover et a tailler, et la piere de la femme si est plus parfont et plus emmiée.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to go to the toilet, then you should take a small amount of well-prepared dung and apply it, and if you cannot find any, then use a small amount of fine earth; and show him a wise old woman who is experienced in matters relating to women, or a woman who knows something about medicine, and instruct her to do what you tell her regarding the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And be sure to check if the woman is a virgin: then she should press her finger into her vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should push it out with her finger, and you must instruct her to press her left hand firmly against her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she should move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the groin, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area. She should not move her finger above or below the stone, and the incision should be made small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then insert the thread into the incision, if you feel that the stone is sharp and cut the flesh so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with horns. Know their likenesses in order to understand how they will come out.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood flows, put in its place powdered vitriol and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, so that the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones to help you with your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows and it is from an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and press it with bandages and bindings, and do not release it again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, as the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work so that the stone comes out.
de hernie carnouse	of meat hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located under the heart of the testicles, within the egg; and it is called "pus," and sometimes it is properly located in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is not the same egg.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles and is spread out from there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours; it may be a yellow colour, or red, or black, or a watery white, and more besides.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this accumulation; if it is in the white pus that we have mentioned, then it is a reon, like an egg, small and round like an egg, and does not burst the testicle, for it has moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscesses will be filled with part of the yolk, and because of this people think it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part of the scrotum, then it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should test all the way around, from which the form is as follows.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the insertion point, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with iron, then the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back, on something a little high, and put a lot of cushions under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the wand to one of the two ribs of the heart;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the lead spatula and cut the skin of the testicles through their length up to the scrotum, and make the incision straight while describing the skin of the testicles until you reach the white subcutaneous tissue, and carefully peel it back according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the subcutaneous tissue with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and stretch out the scrotum upwards; do not touch the testicles themselves, but only the scrotum; cut it all or in pieces just as carefully, for if you do not cut it well, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the scrotum has become detached from your work, then return it to its place when you have finished working on the subcutaneous tissue; then sew up the two lips of the testicles with a single stitch, and then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the suspended vessels, fearing the flow of blood; then cut open the scrotum throughout its suspension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if pus has collected in two parts together, know that these are two pockets; then cut open the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash out the blood and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put another piece of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil on top, and place it over both testicles, and bind it tightly with a double cloth all around according to this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of cloth, and fill them with wool according to this shape, and sew them together at the opening of the pants, and have one piece hold the testicle up against the anus and back, and the other at the part of the groin, and both ends on top of the two thighs; and have all the binding in the loop of the pants.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this ramica of cautery is medicated in the place of an iron brand, and it is that you grip a subtle scalpel, and cut through the skin of the testicles, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white pimple containing pus is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If one takes the cautery according to this form and pierces the pimple gently, and burns it with this subtle hot cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; and know that this action is much safer; and watch out for blood flow and damage from cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything contradicts you, such as a hot abscess or blood flow or anything else, then treat what contradicts you according to what has already been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I have told you, and when you are quite certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the watery fluid is gone,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	then let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to the full depth of the spear-head, and insert the perforation into the body; make the holes wide so that all the water flows out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the rest of the water flow out, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the white membrane does not let the water flow out of the wound, then you must insert a pipe or instrument used to treat dropsy, of which the structure is described earlier; enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water will return, and be gathered again after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the dissection of this branch there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to me that one should leave it untouched.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the testicles; and it is because of various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to be known by excess of bitterness and bile, which is spread throughout the body, or from a blow.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not subside in pain, and is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there is a gray abscess, full of pus and blood, which comes from a vein or a swollen vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, it is recognized by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Those who are made of wine lees are recognized by their appearance through the touch of the fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and anyone can well judge the quality based on this appearance and other similar characteristics;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you should cut the skin of the eggs, then the yolks will be on top, and the white part will be beneath, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already cracked with these new shells, then you must break the egg and crack the shell.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is airy in the face or in those who are inside the vessels, then you must deliver all that membrane and crack it smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the crack is at the back of the shell, then you must crack it all and extract the egg as we have said.Et s’il y a u neuue char ou dedens la tenve, si covient que tu la cope et la delivre, et mets l’uef en autre vaissel.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, then dress the wound with soft wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a plum, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient groans painfully when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is also painful like this one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles tightly with your fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	holding all the vessels that are close to the penis, and pulling them upwards, and stretching them firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a scalpel across the width of the vessels, as far as they are exposed
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape from each side, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle where there is .a. double thread, and ties it at the first place where the vein came from, and ties it directly to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he cuts them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then cure the wound as with the others or wrap it tightly, so that no blood vessels rupture and bleed out from either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	this does no harm, and if all the vessels are closed, then one should draw out the clotted blood from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the vein does not lose its clotting because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rotgut wound
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The causes of this disease are the incisions that come from syphilis, or the swelling on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this opening is from syphilis, or from the swelling of it; and these two types of fester come from many causes: from a blow, or a fall, or from straining, or from lifting a heavy load, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs that it is from a syphilitic ulcer are that it occurs bit by bit over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even throughout, up to the depth, because the syphilis presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the sinus, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are different abscesses appearing underneath the skin close to the surface, and it is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body from the sinus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the fester comes with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments using iron, there is fear, which is why one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of the treatment is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand inside the wound if he can reach it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then press on his neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then turn him over on his back and brush all the hair from his chest
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then push inside the lips of the wound with a hook according to what you need in order to open the wound, and let such that the pus can come out
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the scrotum skin that is under the chest skin, until the white, tough scrotum skin is uncovered all over
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your index finger in that which follows the anus, in that which is between the white membrane which is under the shell of the egg, and between the second membrane
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second membrane; and then move the right hand inside the anus, and hold the white membrane up in your left hand, and lift the egg out of all the membranes towards the tail;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to hold the egg upright, and untie that which is behind the diaper;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped up in or a hard white membrane, and if you find anything, then put it back into the belly underneath;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle with .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and insert it into the rear part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then tie the threads that appear, so that there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then tie them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the scrotum, of which we have said is underneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong string of  .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the threads around the scrotum and tie them tightly, so that no blood vessels that nourish it can enter, so that an abscess does not form;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the thread according to the first long line of   .ij. parts from that one, and after these   .ij. lines leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles the size of a bean;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut into the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the ligature that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt about blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and leaves the ligature until it bleeds through; and if it is slow to bleed, then use hot water, and apply what we have said until it bleeds.Car li sans ne peut corer s’i n’est de l’aigue chaude ou feu que nos avons dit.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch that is together with the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above gently from below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then press upon me, and open the abscess of him who works, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes the anus tears, as we have said, and the wound opens; and none of the intestines come out, and if they do, it is only a little, and they heal up again in no time.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	But if he stays too long at this point, the wound will fester and the intestines will come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens because of the swelling of the abscess near the anus, as we have said, for it is swollen, then softened and swollen, and the wound opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then press the site of the fracture hard with a broad instrument according to the quantity of 3 eggs;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then pull out the sac which is under the skin where the abscess is, then take the thread and place it on the exposed area of the abscess;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	then press it deeply into the abdomen, then sew up the 2 exposed areas of the abscess on the head of the thread, and sew one and then the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the head of the vein, and cover it with nothing but syrup or extend the wound with anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal wounds;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it like any other wound. And when you cover the stitches, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in the wound, and cautery is better for this purpose and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat this, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring together the two edges of the wound with a single stitch, and if you see that there is excess softened skin, sew it shut with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it heals, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Do you know that chastisements are forbidden in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the surgeon can respond when asked, and understand how to treat them; and the other is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and horses and other beasts. I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. For the method we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until his testicles are softened and hanging; then grab them with your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel anything. For the castration by cutting: one must tether the animal, and cut the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie off the scrotum, and cut each sac in one place when you have well-scratched them; and I leave some pus and the thin membrane that covers the vessels; and this method of castration is better than the one by attraction, because in the one by attraction sometimes something remains in the testicles, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	There are two kinds of hermaphrodites: the first is when between the two genitals there is an opening like a woman's vagina, with pubic hair and sometimes urination occurs from it.  The second type is in women, who have a penis on their groin and two genitals.  The treatment for both men and women is to bandage everything tightly, and treat them as you would other wounds; but for the second type of man, where urine escapes through the skin around the genitals, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is a swelling on the natural part, so ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. You should dye the excess of the testicle with your hand or fingernail, and bandage it lightly; and do not go too deep, so that no bleeding occurs, then cure it with another cure until it is healed; and for one which emerges at the mouth of the womb, use it, and perhaps it will work, and it is according to the likeness of a cow, and therefore they call it the "cow disease". You should bandage it, just as we have said for the testicle, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratique is when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the opening is small; and it is by nature from birth, or by accident through illness that has come to be; or it is due to a foreign object, or a sottish tumor, and is formed in the womb, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever; and it should be understood by examination of the belly. If the tumor is clearly apparent, then you should examine it with your fingers or with a stick. If it is a sottish tumor and it is close to the skin, then you should do this: place the woman on her back with her legs spread out, and form the two lips so that the sottish tumor becomes visible and the tumor is exposed; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and have the woman lie down for a day or so that it may not adhere. And if the tumor is hard and solid, then you should cut it with a spatulum similar to a bay leaf. If the tumor is made of flesh, then one must suspend it and cut it; and one should use medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white beaten together; then prepare a broad lance so that the wound may not close up; and this should be for a long time, and one should apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other treatments until it is healed. And when in the womb there is flesh that has formed, then one must cover it according to this manner, if it is not an abscess. For in an abscess that is in the womb, one should not touch it in order to pierce it.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are opened veins that bleed without cause, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become throbbers; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and how to treat them. I say that hemorrhoids and throbbers, when they are completely inside the anus and do not appear to the touch, cannot be cured by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the anus can be felt, and they can be treated. Therefore, you should first put the woman in a cold room; then, cut off the hemorrhoids with tongs, and burn their roots; then powder them with medicines that constrict blood vessels, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, let her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it to apply to her back. And if it stops, that's good. If not, make her breathe leeches on her back and breasts without using iron; then take wool, moisten it in plantain juice or dogwood juice mixed with old wine, and make her breathe it in at the affected spot. And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and looks like a rough head, so it should be covered as I have said for throbbers; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the text into English:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	There are many types of abscesses that occur in the anus, such as ulcers, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as other diseases that I have described in the previous section. Therefore, I will now describe the treatment for a hot abscess that occurs in the anus, which is not among the types that heal quickly. If you want to know how to treat it with iron instruments, observe whether the abscess is soft at the beginning of its appearance, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it turns red when you look at it. Then, do not rush to pierce it; instead, let the pain subside first. Then, make the patient sit on a low stool or chair, with their feet elevated so that their back is tilted slightly forward, and their knees bent with their arms placed under their knees. Tie their arms securely with a strong cord, then suck the anus to open it and insert the instrument used for this purpose. Check the depth of the anus so that the instrument does not go in too far and injure the patient. If the instrument is large, cover the entrance of the anus with cloth to prevent discomfort. Then, insert the tip of the instrument and apply pressure. When the abscess breaks open and the content is discharged, treat the wound with soft tents dipped in rose oil or virgin oil. Place the tent inside the wound, reaching deep into the anus, and put a pad soaked in warm water or a decoction of mallows on top of the wound and around it. After two days of treatment with suitable ointments, the wound will begin to heal. Sometimes, raising the anus and applying a poultice made of water and honey, followed by a poultice of mallows that have been cooked in water, is beneficial. Then, return to treating the wound with ointments. If the wound has subsided but is still open, refrain from using iron instruments for treatment. Instead, follow the methods described earlier in the text.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is important for the midwife to know the natural signs of childbirth, and to understand what to look for when you see a woman struggling to breathe and desiring to smell aromatics; then you know that the baby is about to be born quickly. The natural birth occurs when the baby emerges head-first, with the placenta following close behind; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the baby is delivered swiftly. For when the baby descends, the placenta follows, and the mother's body is cleansed of its excess fluids through a good purification ritual; anything else is not considered natural. Sometimes, however, the baby may present feet-first, or may emerge from the torso, arms, or abdomen, and in rare cases, the birth may be inverted, with the baby's head facing upwards instead of down. In such cases, it is crucial for the midwife to be wise and knowledgeable about these variations, guard against mistakes and disappointments, and I will now describe all the different positions and how to assist in each case.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby is born head-first in a natural delivery, and the woman is struggling, and her vitality is weak, then have her sit on a stool or be supported by other women; prepare an aromatic oil made from cooked celery seed or fenugreek, and then use a small spatula to apply it between her buttocks, as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and split the placenta, and press her nails into her skin until the fluids inside flow out; and press her belly so that the baby descends, and if he doesn't descend, then give the woman a enema with a mixture of fenugreek and olive oil; then have her sneeze and cough to stimulate her bowels, and hold her mouth and nose closed for an hour: then the baby will be delivered.And if both hands emerge, then gently push them back in one by one; but if they cannot go back in, then have the woman sit on a chair, and lift her feet up so that they are elevated; then tilt the chair backwards so that she is lying down, and if the hands still won't go in, and the baby is dead, then grasp the hands at the knuckles and pull them out, and deliver the baby in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out of its feet, it should be pushed upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slowly and gently until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then grasp the foot and extend it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct it to grab, and make it sneeze with this condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back and forth gently until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take mussel shell, and oil of sesame, and molten gum, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply this ointment to the woman's privates and drive it out.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is soft underneath, make a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and pinch her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out soon.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this way, then he puts his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then let him be supported on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bends his hands little by little, then presses his hands on the belly, and lifts the cushions underneath, until she is ready to pass down;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the fetus does not emerge, then take her feet and move them about, then move her belly upwards, then push with your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and deliver the child little by little; and instruct the woman to press herself until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child's exit, which comes out as wide as a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must find a way to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if they cannot bring it back, then have the woman stand up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then let her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the medicine that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, then study how to bring the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and turn the baby according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and tell her to squeeze until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the baby's exit on its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I must tie her hand, then turn it little by little, and hold it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then place on it a poultice of alum and oil as we have said, then instruct that it move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then let her sit on a chair, and instruct her to hold it in; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out in this way for all of the afterbirth, then catch the afterbirth with your fingers, as long as the moisture is expelled;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child bites on its face and neck, and the mother slaps it, let it not be restrained, and the child will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as far as it should go, and instruct the woman to hold herself back at times:
adonques si istra legierement.	then if it is too loose.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are a strange thing, and do not live long if they are born prematurely.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied and separated by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue just as naturally as a single child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they bleed a lot, then treat as we have said, and be subtle in your movements, and quickly and lightly do what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and act thus as it benefits their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more, up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorious sage,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is fitting that the surgeon know all this, for by chance a similar thing might happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	then act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating a woman for a dead child or fetus, as I have said in the division, and no blood comes out, and you are compelled to use manual pressure;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if you need to know whether the woman is of sound health and has no fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	the woman should be lying on her back with her head tilted down and legs lifted up.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should use a ten-part mixture to apply to her womb, if she is lying in bed, so that the child can be delivered.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils, mixed with musk, altée, and fenugreek, and linseed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then press them gently into the wound, then bind it up in the usual way where it is convenient,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and be careful that the child does not slide down onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if it thrusts them into itself in its eyes or throat or mouth or under the beard or near the armpits,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the dislocation is in the feet, strike or press at the middle of the shins;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he holds the needle in his right hand and places the thread between the fingers of his left hand, and ties it around all of his fingers lightly, and inserts the needle into any of the holes we have described so that it reaches the hollow place.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is how the needle should be formed:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then pierce with another needle, or a third one if you need it, so that the extraction is even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are moved evenly back and forth to extract it, and the needles should be bitten down upon to hold them in place, as shown in this image:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, then anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and press it into that part, and draw out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if nothing remains, then place this joint or a higher one, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must wrap it in .a. cloth, so that it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then press on the joint of the sole or on the ankle; and so you should do with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the outlet, or it has a sharp point
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	you should push the spathomile between your fingers, pierce the head, and draw out the water
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can use the instrument called "almidach", of which the shape comes with the instruments in this chapter;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so, the infant is naturally born with a large head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head pops out and is forced, it is split until the moisture that is in the wound comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces as much as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is above his feet, the pulse is light, and the breath comes easily to the mouth.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the belly or the groin, then you must strap it tightly with a bandage around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and pierce the belly or the groin, so that the moisture which is within flows out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limbs are paralyzed, and the eyes remain
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	then he bathes his hand in warm water, and leads it up to the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he adds one ounce or two ounces, and draws it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then you must apply moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and he applies poultices, and softens and moistens with water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the fetus is on its side, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said about a living child:
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no strength, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if they are given what we have said for abscesses that come in the sea;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and bloodletting comes, it should be placed in restraining water, and other remedies are administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her; then another was sewn over him, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came in his arm, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong drawing plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	Examine the wound, and with your hands pull out bones until the woman feels better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And let the woman walk like this for a long time, and she will suddenly feel a bit of relief from her pain.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I have only included this chapter because when masters find an unusual case, they should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one adds the books; and at .2 turns as .2 heads of .2 lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, let the horns be more slender in the constrictor, and made of boxwood or of ivory;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the beam be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit, and long a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the two beams there are two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly joined together, one half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two settings are placed in the mouth of the wound to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pincers;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two heads with two settings, as you can see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the wound opened with all the instrument, let the woman sit on a bed, hanging her feet and opening her legs,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then insert the two pieces of the instrument into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument under between your thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you see the opening of the wound, until the patient makes the face she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the patient sees them prepared, the action is faster and higher in people because of their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair over the instrument, but prepare it, for their need is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with a scent, and pinch her nose and mouth tightly.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she vomits, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pitcher and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire; then put one end into the pitcher and the other into the mouth of the mother,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the dye as long as the vapors come within the wound; then make it sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the pus comes out quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not gone, then command the patient to wet her left hand in oil of wormwood or in a poultice of alder, and then put it into the wound.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and wants to find the pus; and when she has found it, she should squeeze and stretch it gently little by little, so that the wound does not hurt with the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; so it will come out and release itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and of the fume of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not [healed] by all that we have said, then beware that you do not cut;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the person at the mouth of the wound ties it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse with four-fold ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it can be released and reset, then it will come out; but still, when it is released in this way, there comes a bad odor to the stomach and head, and it harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If necessary, suitable fumigations should be used for this: some ancient writers have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The instrument used to fumigate the woman for retained placenta and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it should be made of glass like a cane, with a slender neck and wide base to sit over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fume over the coals, and the dye until it is wasted, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without their fundaments pierced; instead, they have a thin membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So the midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with a spike or needle; and she should be careful not to tear it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on wet linen with wine and oil, then dress it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, then put a wooden splint through the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes the healing comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a wooden splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulæ which come underneath the fundament are nodular, and growing in size, or from within the fundament, or in the space of two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more fistulæ; and when this nodulation is old, it opens, and then moisture causes a white discharge or thin pus.si l’on queré qu’elle soit seure et close, si convient que li médecins la fasse boire vin clere ou eix,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulæ are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out in egestions or emissions when the patient makes an egestion, and sometimes a worm will jump out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulæ which penetrate as far as the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and down to the testicles.Et si a fistules qu’advenent desoz le fondement et par les costes ou par la nuque, ou par le petis de la cuixe; et sont mals aincis.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fissure which seeps at the anus, and does not seep:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you should stab your index finger or thumb into the anus, and stab a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fissure when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, then you should stab a thin tent made of lead, or a horsehair, as far as you can feel the tent or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you cannot feel it, and there is no egesta or flatulence or discharge as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you know it does not pierce; then you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates as far as the bladder or the duct of urine, and urine escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced as far as the hip joint, then the vein bleeds as far as the spot.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the pain is not relieved, then it will be cured by boiling water and not by ointment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and for these persian ulcers there is no cure other than work, and the folly of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	For that which is not Persian and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And let the patient lie on his back, and lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your index finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and if you feel that the membrane has been pierced; and if it is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then know that it has been perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if you do not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says that some can be healed, but it rarely happens;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help which one does, then one scorches the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and stuff it all hot into the fistula as far as the anus; and do this twice or thrice, as long as you know that these charred tissues are burned, which look like a feather of a bird.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then cure it with moist bandages in butter, as long as the char comes out, and then cure with ointment that softens and heals.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is thus healed, it is good. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters and does not penetrate to the right which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula below the covering of the heart;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	cut at the beginning of the fistula, and then stop it before the tent, and then cauterize afterward, as far as the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered and will fall out; then cut away the false flesh that looks like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus comes out and flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with an astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cautery brings together two things: the burning of the flesh and the clotting of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat with tented bandages moistened in butter or ground substance, until the site drips fluid and the flesh burns through to the bone.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with sudatory poultices of hard, dry matter.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and is removed from the body, put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between them is the thread or the cloth, or it is about to pierce, there is no strength except through faith and hope, by administering one of the three remedies:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tenant who holds the foundation, and let the evacuations come out through there as they wish.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is cured, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, or by tent or other pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then mend that broken bone which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then endeavor to heal the wound and to keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes they are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	Take a tent pierced at the tip in this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and he inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it pierces through the margin inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, just as you would push your finger into the fistula.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head with thread, and bring the two heads together, and hold them tightly for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes, until the threads cut through the flesh between the two;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open on its own, then you must make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage, then treat it, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny spatomile, which they make into a fistula, is very sharp and pointed on one side.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other side it is not, so that one should not cover it, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are of two types: sometimes they are inside the anus like grains of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and some ooze blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	Some have one or more of these hemorrhoids outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have a little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and ooze water or a little yellow water or a little blood, and are the same color as the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you command the patient to stay in bed until the anus heals and the hemorrhoids fall out.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you rush it and grab it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pluck it at its root.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot be held with tweezers due to moisture, then take them with a cloth or cotton or a piece of camel's hair.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Then pull it out with your fingers, pluck it and powder some warm powdered cautery on top.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a biting and harsh enema to wash what is in the foundation so that it can come out clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the patient presses himself, and the thread comes out from under the foundation, then the cure is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and the incision is no longer feared.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary to administer the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and return both ends of the thread under the needle,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too wide; then tighten the thread tightly, tie off the thread, remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place over the wound a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and then apply pressure on it, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then leave it until they heal, and when they are healed, then treat them with ointments and other treatments.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation from natural causes, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If necessary, cut into the skin at the tip of a spatula or your fingernail, so that it does not become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then dry it until it is hard and as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot harden, then restart the scraping more fiercely than before, until it heals completely and is scoured.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A freckle is a small discolouration on the skin, which goes deep under the skin and moves around a lot.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the trembling affects the fingers, and one feels it like a deadness from the trembling, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a cane of goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the vein, until the purple circle surrounds the vein all around;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then return your hand to the entire cane as you press all around the vein, and put it in deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make a cane of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	nor pierced, so that it may hold the finger, and press firmly. And if you see fit, cauterize the vein, just as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they are made of silver or brass, or melted copper or wire; and sometimes they are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are administered for the treatment of children and the weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you can see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each hole there is a distance of one digit, then insert into these holes a strong cord of twisted gut or thread wound around, and assemble the belly so that it looks like a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong cord, then cleanse; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the minister squeezes both ends of the clistere together until it is empty, then withdraw the clistere, and let the patient lie on his side,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as long as he can, and if he sleeps for a night afterwards, it is even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the clistere for the disease of stomach ache, and the medicine rushes to come out, then repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then use an enema as thin as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	This is the form of the thin enema that the skin should be stretched onto:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss the cures by hand and medicine according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The objects that cause wounds are from stone, and sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the places in the body where they are made, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar organs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to him in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care whether it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt whether it is a hot abscess: then have the patient bleed from the head immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and let the patient avoid excesses of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, then his diet should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply a poultice to the wound, if a hot abscess comes, only wet cotton in rose oil, or in astringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is still bleeding and not moved by the air, a powder that I will describe soon;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has been moved by the heat, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together with tenting, then stitch them together, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and gapes, and holds only by a little, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of the hide.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rot in the hide, and it isn't attached to the bone, then cut off the rot completely, and pour out the pus, then cure it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which isn't clotting, and cannot be staunched with medicine, then tie it off, and if you find it loose, bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light; you should put on this powder which heals as soon as the burn is healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and powdered very finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and employ the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it untouched if it doesn't swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved by the fire.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, one should stop it immediately and not put any of this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour made with water and honey, until the swelling goes down;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you below about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is single, then there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's a nerve, there is nothing else that can be done but to leave the wound untreated and not put anything constricting on it, because it harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuations are with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But for the medicine underneath, use warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cooked fennel also washed in warm water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other damp stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep, and she has a fever and is swollen and full of pus, then pierce her or cut her lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the food conduit is kept open, through which the food goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	cut the windpipe above the base of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	then stretch it gently, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with purifying ointments until it heals;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has caused depression in the bone, then treat it thus;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out as far as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave until the wound can heal.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and it should be cleaned and aligned at the site of dislocation;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in that chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if there are no windings around the wound: you will therefore know that the wound is deadly;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it at the first hour or ligature it because of the blood that will ooze out profusely,
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and keep the patient warm;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put on an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound for .iii days, or .iv., or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if a spasm, or trembling of the body, or chills do not come;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and there is a fistula, then you know that there is a wound; then treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the front or back, then treat it as described above;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, by stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn bits, then probe the wound, and pull out the shards if they are loose;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester, so as to ease the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from a large wound, sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the entrance of air;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one puts them in again more easily, if one doesn't put them in hot and cold;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, they contract more with pins.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for this reason it is useful to move the soft wound, and therefore one must move the intestines to their place more than others .ij.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that hernia of the abdomen occurs in .iiij. ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the .ij. common hernias occur in the abdominal wall,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and two other special stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	nevertheless they are more appropriate with stomach wounds, and I will name and explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestines protrudes out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and it can be treated by one of two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or from the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	wet a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you boil in water squinant and cypress and spice,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and boil the intestines until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes it makes restraining wine, and the soul is moved away to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go down, then open the intestines with water or old wine are cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this means the entrance is contracted to a small space.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, they make a small cut in the instrument with which they cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first cure is bloodletting rather than cutting,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	which one should not do without great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument to split it with:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if cut within the curve and not out, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if he puts it back according to its natural shape in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you can, because this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	you should make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	then put the head and the foot higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the .ij. parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	then put the affected part higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so you should treat those wounds which are large and small.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, apply what you have prepared,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have at hand a minister of pity who will spread ointment over the entire wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the edges of the wound,
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of sewing.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	Take a needle or several needles depending on the size of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave a distance of half a digit from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the edge,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is under the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and put together the two heads of the sutures;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then pierce it with a double thread through the needle in two places,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then bring together the two heads of the wound smoothly,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then leave .i. space, and I put another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is bound up;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot pierce well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore they should be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not cut and open the wound before it is healed.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the tips of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and put tents or bandages on the needle heads to keep them in place,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because one or two needles are enough.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is where you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound with one needle and a strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have cut through all four of these bones together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then reset the needle in the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching should be done on a man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which he had received from a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and the intestines were protruding more than two palms in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was below his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought him back the intestines after they had been out for 24 hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewed up until the 15th day, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had judged him that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where there were neither any of these things nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and pierce it from the outside just to the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart directly, then lay the end of the siphon or tube on top of where you have inserted the needle
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce another part of the inside up to the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the technique for this suturing is that you sew just like a leatherworker sews hides,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the siphon once on one side and then pull it through to the other, so that the suturing is all completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is like how one joins two pieces of wood together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and applies the end of one piece to the other end, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	push a needle or awl through both pieces near their ends, and only pierce those spots,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two shoulders of the syphyllis;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside inwards just to the inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as two shoulders of the syphyllis;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and the other from the outside inwards just to the inside, in two other shoulders of the syphyllis that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the better way of sewing and the more common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says these words, and some testify to them,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must sew the belly with .ii. needles, having thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroded holes;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is in the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	the sutures are more painful than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the heat has not moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If you reset it to allow the intestine to return, then put on the binding powder over the wound.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if it burns, put some ointment on it that is available until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And cut the thread and sew up the wound, and use myrrh and honey.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healed.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, put on old cotton immediately when it begins to ooze.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't need any other medicine for various wounds when they are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if necessary, you should moisten it with a little warm oil, or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it around the angles and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or swelling in the bowels, and this happens many times,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	then treat him in the manner that I tell you. If he has dark, watery diarrhea, and especially if the swelling comes just up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces inside, and you can tell when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the thread jumps out of the wound, it pulls it back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turned white or black, then you must tie the area that has turned black so that blood does not flow into it,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries in it;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the two shoulders hanging from the part below the wound until it is released to ease the extraction when the splinters are removed, and the wound is healed.
de la routure dou boueil	of the route of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	one can restore it in some cases,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw a man who was stabbed in the belly with a lance;he had a small wound and yet he survived.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became a fistula, and from it issued flatulence and winds;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it with cautery according to what I could do, and did not cease subtilizing until it was healed and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that it was healing, I doubted that the patient had discomfort in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm done, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experiencers say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take fine thread, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it above the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it pulls out its mouth above;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then grabs its head, and it stays so that it cannot untie itself,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another tremor after in the same way, until the wound is completely healed;
et cout la plaie.	and watch the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If these parasites are found in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this intestinal thread that is very thin,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the head of this thread a fine, twisted linen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then pass the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and relase it in the wound;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing up the intestines is not useless except according to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no healing without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	You should know that any wound or abscess, when it erupts, is universally called a "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and especially when it is deep and narrow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	A fistula is according to the definition a hard, white nodule without pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is as smooth as a bird's feather;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it is clear, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no scabs,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	these are caused by one of the eight causes;
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by a little wound or injury;
ou por sa malice;	or because of their wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not let the flesh grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much bowing;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the skin is loose, and the tissue is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a form of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or by the property of the region is delayed digestion, and late health, and swollen by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done with the hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur throughout the body's limbs;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the syrinx, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the sides,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are painful to heal, and there is no benefit but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point that I have described, and you are confident in the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you see it, take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a thin tent of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the lead bends with the crookedness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	And if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well search it out by tents,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	then cleanse it through one of its openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for moisture quickly runs from one hole to another, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you shall let it bleed until you know whether there is bone or nerve involved, and it is deeply pierced;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it most;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and once you truly know the location, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places I have told you about, according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the dirt and rotten cart-wheels that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then clean the wound until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is quite deep in a straight line, you should cut it open as far as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I wet tents with medicine water, and insert them into the fistula up to its head,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the surplus that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply healing ointments to the healthy flesh, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve afflicts the principal limbs as we have said,
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and darkness, then treat it until all the corruption is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then clean it with things that are soothing until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not cured, and returns as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you have not gone to the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	uncover and dig as deep as you can,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is like this without pain, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way, let it heal naturally;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone that has become corrupt, and you can pull it out with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if he extracts it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, he should extract them all without leaving any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	then cut through flesh and moisture and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something upon the wound to promote suppuration,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it remain until pus has formed around the bone,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have a looser joint;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you just treat the infection until all the darkness is gone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large amount of corruption, and it comes to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it needs to be cut out and covered up completely until the corruption is reached, then clean the wound until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that arose within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the matter came out of the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no pus to drain from it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but they looked at their folly so much that they opened the abscesses
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and many materials came out and became a fistula, and many openings came from which all pus and moisture flowed from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many looked for a cure for two years, and there was no wise person in the art of medicine,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was called there, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what runs through the pores of the body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the youth's body turned red and had a yellow hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent at one of these openings, and then I examined all the openings,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I therefore hurried, and pressed one of the orifices until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to treat the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then begin again, and expose the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then closed the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not until I split the bone for a palm's width, and I drove it out to all its root,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicine; and it was healed and closed quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and one must not repeat the operation except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for fear of his death which I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For by the evacuation he often bled, but he was entirely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and there grew in the place of the bone hard flesh, and he was of good disposition and did not have any harm or evil anywhere, nor in going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be treated thus:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take a thread, and tie it to the head of the bone which appears,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and have someone pull it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and take another thread of thicker wool than the first, and tie it to the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh underneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the area where you see it is swelling, so that the swelling does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot brand or a table under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must draw as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and draw again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then it discovers all the flesh; then put under it a brand
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then sear from one side of the corruption to the other, and make the blister as long as the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in a joint, cut open the joint and sear the bone on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the dislocation is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cover it;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the dislocation is at the base of the hand or the foot, it is a very serious matter,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nevertheless you must examine the patient, how it appears to them;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the veins or nerves;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the chisel and the files for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the ears
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason one must prepare for each type of work its own instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to your knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and witness the ways of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	then examine the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders may protrude due to internal causes or external causes;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have treated that corrosion with remedies, and they do not help,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you should cover the limb up to where the corrosion is,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes through death, or through the greater evil, from the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then comes darkness, after which the corrosion of the limbs spreads from limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and throughout the body; so you must hurry to cover it up,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the sting of poisonous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea, vipers, and similar creatures,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is on the head or neck, then cover it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to the hand, then grip at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, then grip near the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is deadly,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no remedy for this except by reducing its power;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so too when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then grip after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, cut off the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient with a stab to the throat;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way of binding the member whether above or below, it should be tied above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and one minister stretches one of the strings downstream, and another minister stretches the other string upstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you loosen the rope that is between the two strings to a width of one palm, so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the cord or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and cause the patient another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if there is bleeding when you operate, then cauterize the wound liberally.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the wounded member with an appropriate bandage and treat it until it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a certain man in a dream:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	a darkness resembling a burn from fire occurred to him
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion first appeared on his toe of the foot, so that it spread all over the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and a long time after, the corrosion returned to the toe of the hand, and he came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put upon him things that rebound after cleansing of the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cup his hand, and I did not want to, for I had no hope of rebounding the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubted that if I cut his hand, that he would die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he healed his hand;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	I have told this story only to show that one should do this, if they need to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	then they rupture and drain, and the flesh remains, just like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is as thin as a loose napkin,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not reach to the bone or nerve, and such a malady is called 'healthy',
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called 'fistula';
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends to the bone, then it is called 'fistula'.;
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is to wrap the skin all around it, especially when it is thin, as one would a piece of cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not worry about its destruction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you are worried that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, then the cure is thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look to see if the breasts are large, and if the bowels within are of foul odor.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	therefore cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine which is made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take asafétida, oil, and quicklime, in equal parts, and mix and cook them in a vessel over fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and use it as an enema in the breast, and tighten the orifice;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for .ij hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this a number of times, until the breast is deflated and the pore is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes they are blisterized with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and you should take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then strain it and blister with it as much as you know the wound is clean;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if he is enema with water and honey or with a little litarge ground.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you can use honey and honeyed wine for the enema; let the honey have the property of cleansing and washing away.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the body perspire.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this and are sure that the intestines are well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if they use a cautery on him which produces pus within
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you prepare an ointment with diaphoretic herbs, and apply it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you may cauterize him with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the opening of his anus is small, and the tip of the cautery instrument cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only enough room for the catheter to enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the orifice that urinates is above, then the cup or lower down where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is perfect, one does not allow the arrow to become lodged inside.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	set up the bow in such a way that it points to the lowest place it can reach,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bow is perfect, one does not allow the arrow to become lodged inside.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	prepare in such a way: that the bowstring runs smoothly down, and do not leave anything of the bowstring;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to put over the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then press with force the opening of the breast . The hole must be larger than the first .
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then there is a soft ointment on another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the opening,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the breast opening to align the bowels, and do not remove the large bandage for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And the one who is on the breast opening, remove often to remove the bowels,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and be wary if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has spread in such a way, and you see the nature that jumps out of the opening of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast is open, and approaches the saint;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows in an unripe state after several days, know that the breast will not produce milk.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons flow after a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because the saints are near. For there are people whose wounds fester for a long time, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if milk does not flow from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not open;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts are delayed in opening, and are distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as with diaphoretics, for there is a great part of vitriol in them, and that is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix in equal amounts of old wine;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and with the same mixture, thicken honey.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when a definite ointment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then they glue a piece of cloth, and press it onto the breast, and sometimes they administer an aromatic poultice,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is like wheat flour and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simple or compound medicines: grind them to a powder and place it on the honey I mentioned earlier and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the wound is long and not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard body, or in the soft tissue.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that arises underneath the fingernail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Or by a stone, or perhaps it sprouts in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it becomes diseased, and no attention is paid, then an abscess forms and bursts;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and ooze pus until they reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they even cut all the way through;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is swollen and the colour is yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat him as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	you must cut away all the excess that has accumulated under the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to push out, and bleeds,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	you should place a thread under the nail so that it stops pushing against the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and draw it up gently and gently cut the flesh underneath,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place burning and corrosive medications on top to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the swelling until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then dig it out and cut it away, because as long as the bone remains corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the tooth decayed, pull it out in the manner previously described,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the swelling until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then clip the fingernail of the big toe with a diagonal cut from above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deaf person's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	There are two types of warts that grow on people's hands by chance: they can be all fleshy,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone in them and sometimes nails,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some grow at the base of the joints, where the growth comes from the knuckles.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who is born with a hernia of the navel should not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and he who is born at the junction of the navel, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that grow at the root of the joint are difficult to cure; you must cover them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	For those growing on the back of the neck, you must first shave the hair around it in a circle up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, cut the skin down to the bone with a suitable blade, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Joints can be united by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by a burn, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is fitting that you correct this wound, so that its parts are restored according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not adhere.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two pieces of thin plywood, until the wound is closed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If adhesion occurs to one of his hands with the palm, correct that adhesion as it should be.
Des vils	Of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large enveloped vessels filled with melancholy humours that come into various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more in legs of those who walk and labor and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil drink.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with fire can be done in two ways: one is to use a cautery on the head of the wound, drawing out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision is done in this way: first, heat the leg with very hot water until the large vessels are made subtle,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg from the sick person from above the thigh to just below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then squeeze and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bandage it, and instruct him to drink possets with black wine;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and start the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The treatment of it is as follows: shave the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put him in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then rub the area around the vein from the top of the knee to the foot, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the vein, and blister it from each side, until it is sore when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pierce it under the skin, so that it is raised up from the skin, and then it can be easily pulled out at the tip,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cut into it in another place above it, twice; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it up with a pair of tongs, as you have done before, and pull it out with another pair of tongs, as you did before;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut another strip, or several if you need them, then lift it, and press it against the bottom of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull and lift it until you reach the second strip; then pull it out, strip by strip, until it is all removed, then press it down;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a needle with strong, doubled thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	then tie it and pull it out, and insert the needle under a nail, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot milk or raise it, and this brings harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have milked it entirely, then place on the site of the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	you must split it twistingly, but do not break it; and milk it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one opens the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it opens the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	It is of a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and sometimes it grows elsewhere, and this happens from the scabs that form under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	like serpents and worms that nestle between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this illness are that there is a great swelling in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then change the location, and the illness will begin to emerge, just as a plant's root emerges from the ground.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is exposed, it is necessary to wrap a piece of woolen cloth around it, one and a half yards long, and tie it tightly.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	Let the woolen cloth hang down from the head to the leg, and every time he tries to get away, wrap him up in the cloth again, and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	If the cloth is too long, cut off a piece and wrap the rest around him, but do not cover his head at all while it is still coming out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	Because if you cover him completely, it will go back into the body and cause an abscess and swelling in that place, and a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	it must be treated slowly and gradually until it reaches the head, and nothing should remain in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And sometimes this vein, when it is opened for five or ten inches, or even more,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and once a man came to me whose vein was opened for ten inches, and when you cover it, it makes one hole or aperture, and pierces all the way through,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that all fluids inside are discharged; and then administer warming medications for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein opens on its own, especially when it breaks out at the joint of the foot, or in the foot,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there is a great gushing of blood; treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms which grow between skin and flesh:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to oxen,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and there is a small worm that hatches between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body going up and down,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it can be felt moving from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and it is feared for its maliciousness, for when it moves through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance re-enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him being healed and milked, he cannot be restrained except when he wants to:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So you must tie the area above and below with a strong, tight string,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then milk on top of it and if the venom is deep in his body and you do not draw it out,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize it with fire above, as it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, then firmly pull the lash out from under the eyelid, and pull upwards.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	It is necessary to use a purifying medicine for the body to dissolve the bad humour that has been poured out,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and from eating putrid meats.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	quicker than anything else, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how it moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in that way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I had seen many who experienced pain moving from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I have not seen this happen to a woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because women's bodies are dry and their veins exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason the wind is confined to a small space;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	examine it above and below thoroughly, then press upon it until that forced windiness leaves its place.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it yourself,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure is done by someone who expels windiness, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity lies in that there are those with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have two angles, and of those that have teeth, and of those where there are parts;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and it breaks in any limb in two ways: either in a principal limb it breaks,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore breaks in any of these limbs, and the signs of death that I will tell you about below appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must take care when extracting this arrow, because death comes after in many cases.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and if the wound is not completely healed and there are no bad signs, then pull out the arrow and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when the sign of the brain is seen, the arrow has pierced the bone and passed through to the brain, and the pus that flows out from it,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there is a cut and bleeding, and blackness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without force from the nose or ears, or perhaps loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the wound there issues white moisture resembling pus, and also blood as in an open wound;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, desist from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of a wound when it sinks into the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, and not hollow;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and if it affects the brain, it silences it like the hair, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves the lung is that without pain foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits in the covering of the foot, it is between the small ribs; and there is great swelling and great pain and breathing; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something undigested will jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the bowel but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain, know that this wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and hip and thigh and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you can do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man that an arrow struck him in the jaw near the ear:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it and dislodged it from under the ear lobe, and he was healed without any numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I extracted an arrow that had struck him under the eyelid, below the eyeball:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was drawn back, but its tip reached only as far as the shaft.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was great, from a Turkish bow, to all .I. light metal ears; the game was healthy, and no bad incidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he shot an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	The game was healthy; it was a great discomfort to the Christians. I cut off the beards, and made it subtle until I took it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And he drew an arrow out of a man who had it lodged in his head or belly, and I thought he was going to die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and he had no ill effects.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn up on top;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and keeps the arrow inside him, and does not change his natural dispositions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and finds no harm in any of his natural actions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you will see another man who got an arrow in his face and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and stayed like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And drew an arrow from the head of one of the king's men who had it lodged in his brain,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly bent to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to attend the wound after it had been treated for four days. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I probed it with a thin needle and felt nothing;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed a cooling and digestive plaster on the area, because the ears were swollen;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the place where the arrow had hit.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the ointment many times, and the wound healed directly, and the patient suffered for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound many times until it was open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I probed it and felt the tip of the arrow which stuck out in the middle;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied the medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it passed well within four months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I lanced the wound that I had probed with tweezers, and it would not drain;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	therefore I did not cease from subtlety and cunning with instruments, until I took it on the first day with well-made tweezers,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to what form it will come out at the end of this chapter, as I have experienced it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewed up and the patient completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you about the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, because books cannot understand everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise teacher considers well very little, and what is present and lacking to him,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	discovers new remedies and instruments, and the descending of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows grow in the members where they are lodged in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out through where it entered is an arrow entering their flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes putrid and the exit wound heals.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it's lodged in the bone and can't be removed, then leave it for several days, moving it slightly each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps; and if it does not jump, then pierce around with a very fine needle until the hole is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow has pierced into the bone of the skull, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have mentioned are apparent in the patient: then do not pull it out, but let it be until it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes just to the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach the sinus,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient stays for some days without any bad effects, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck deeply and cannot be removed, then administer cauterization around it, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged deep within the body and cannot be seen, then cut it off at the tip;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then open it as widely as possible;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that are holding it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you can, remove the arrow that is stuck in two parts at the wound.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you do not break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the flesh around it is swollen, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding makes it worse, then administer what we have said about its treatment in that chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of cutting into the nerve and opening a vein, and use every means you can to pull out the arrow without danger,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to how they were when the arrow struck them,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then position him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	Arrows that come from elsewhere, or where something is seen or felt protruding from them, or the skin is swollen in that area:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Then cut above it, as high as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it does not come out at once,
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, then rotate your hand rapidly, so that it goes into the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now, and then try again to extract it until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrow in it, then it is stuffed with everything.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the shaft is broken, and you see to administer a bandage, then it administers an instrument that is chewed,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the tip of the arrow goes into the gum of the instrument; and then it fills up
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is chewed, then it puts an instrument with a point entering in, to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, as much as you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then clean the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits in the buttocks, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is superficial, and you can cut over it, then cut over it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut into the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then sew up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of tweezers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the tip that grabs is also like an owl's beak:
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push out at the tip of the arrow, as is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tweezers to pull and to check if it is there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one heals are 31, from which there are 16 in the head,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	that is to say: .xi. parts which are behind the ears, which are called the two "lobes".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the .ii arteries that are visible in each temple;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and .ii veins that are in the .ii eyelids, which are called  "lids";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two windpipes which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips at the mouth, and these are the veins called 'augerich';
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and 2 veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	There is one of the head, and it is on the left side, and people call it 'vein of the head'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called a 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people call it the 'vein of the heart'. And the basilic vein is on the right side;
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people call it the 'vein of the belly', and it is above the pubis,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one that heals, which becomes clearly apparent above the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saving vein is that between the little finger and ring finger, and also has two branches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg there are three veins: one is under the bend of the scrotum on the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are .iij. veins below them.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts, and with emigrant;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the bloodletting, as I told you, and it is that you treat the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and wipe the area around the veins with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a rope,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the .ij. veins appear behind the ears, in .ij. depending from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	tie them therefore at your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, so press in;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancelet, and pierce it under the vein right up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and pierce both skin and vein well through two fingers, and make the blood issue until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then press and bind it until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	I have already described incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples; this is useful for ancient migraines,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and for eye pain and tears due to agues;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the surgeon are as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that both veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels pain under your armpit, and then signs in there;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lightly press the vein near the top of your index finger, and insert the lance underneath,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and open the vein at the top, and the vein, as you have done in the .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosen the bandage, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then ligate it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as effective for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the qualities are such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called a "gouger", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the point over the vein, press firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed and sometimes use a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not right that the flames be too sharp; and the sick person should not move about, because the bone is close by, and perhaps the flames will break when they are thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	They cure two veins which are in two tendons, and they help with tinea, and redness, and oriels in the eye, and illnesses of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the nature of their cure is that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then he heals it, and the healing is through the cross, a little from the long part of the flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they may break; then make an incision to draw blood, as much as you need, and then bind it on a cotton pad, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The bleeding from the vein in the nose is good for nose bleeds, and for sudden fainting, and for facial illnesses,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient turns his neck, then pulls on his nose with his left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the thin flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well thus, and the blood will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it one night, for it is restored very quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The healing of the two wounds aids in the constriction of the throat, and in the beginning of hoarseness, and in many illnesses, and in impetigo, and in ulcers, and in herpes, and in stomachaches;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck downward on both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and the master stands above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein of the long one quite widely, then draw the tempered blood, or as much as is needed.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another cut on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently press on both veins.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	letting the patient breathe, and leave it until morning so that the wound heals.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the bleeding of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of healing are to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they are known by their being black, and because around them there are fine black veins;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then grip one and the other, and if you do not know them and doubt which is which,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	take the thickest of each part, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same technique.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the bleeding under the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the liver, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the bleeder is that the patient holds his hand in front of the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then cleanse both of them and do not go too deep because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	Veins from which blood is commonly drawn can be treated in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with a sharp mertin, or olive-wood splinter, very thin, called "anesil."
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of myrtle is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open veins that are smooth and full of visible blood, and contain thick and troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and that is the shape of the flame of the olive tree:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and subtle, used for bleeding veins that are fine and contain subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the surgeon should bleed it, and take care of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he pierces the artery, and there is bleeding, then it must be stanched as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flamme should not be pinched but cut so that it does not burn.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil does not open obviously, then you must stretch it and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you can take some of it, or you can open the vein in the arm: it will open obviously;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the cupping glass to the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to find the place to bleed, you must stretch the arm and feel for the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the site with the point, then tie the arm, and press the vein with the flame of the torch;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the site puff up, for that is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulge upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the arm be bound, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him be on watch, and do not move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds and medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for that is where the blood comes from; and staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of cork, cut it in half, and take one half and bind it on well until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then cut it again, as we have said, with powders that stanch blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the bandages are not wrapped in various ways due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The bleeding from a vein in the middle, if it draws blood from the head above and from the body below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	this is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deeply, and he should find the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the saint is distressed, and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens in many places, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument gently; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they cut it open.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the cephalic nerve helps, causing blood to be drawn from the head and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed him with a flame from an olive tree or a myrtle, for that is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest vein, and if one misses it the first time, and begins again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps they will inflame some people's veins, if one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought process.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is not performed unless to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent illnesses from coming;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the bleeding is done in one of the three veins: namely, the cephalic, the fast, and the basilica;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one must bleed him the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered to the sick has no specific time, but when there is a need during the day or night, at all times and in every season.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very elderly who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to cleanse themselves, in whatever way, they should empty the intestines with a gentle enema,
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful excess waste from the intestines to the main organs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Do not cleanse those who are too full from meat, nor those who are drunk, unless they have fasted for a long time or are suffering from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if they have had diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal discharge, or excessive sexual intercourse, or if they are recovering from surgery, or suffering from a fever, or if they are weak due to illness or injury.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtlely draw out the humors if the illness is strong, through meats and drinks and medicine if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then into a bath, if nothing else will help, to draw out the blood subtly,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal the vein from the bottom up to the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep that day for work, and piercing, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And he is bound and joined, and the surgeon stands above him whom he heals, and rubs the arm ii or iii times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then they loosen the ligature above the wound, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal well.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then he rubs the area with his hands until the veins swell and they can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then he moistens the surgeon's blade with a little old oil, then puts his finger from his left hand on the wound under the place where he wants to heal,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	that the vein does not burst when being pricked with a needle.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flow like cords into the body, and some that are filled with wind,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one places it over the flame, it withdraws from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus is it with some people;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, the wound is too tight, so one must be careful with these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, do it again a little lower down on that spot or higher up, if the vein is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vein is swollen and the patient feels faint, let him rest for a day or two and do not bind his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps there will be warm abscesses; do not enter the bath, then start bleeding again if she wants to.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the hole is small, pierce it with a needle and you suspect that not enough blood will come out as you want, then pierce that same hole directly with a flame.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work gently, so as not to inflame the wound; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area is inflamed, do not restart the bleeding and apply a little olive oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil that is applied is beneficial.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus use olive oil in every bleeding that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this also makes a tourniquet and bandage from cloth, when it is applied to the area; it tightens the blood vessels and reduces the flow of blood when it is too abundant.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if a large abscess comes, which happens many times, especially when it is not cleansed until after the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	take an sponge moistened in water and in some little warm vinegar, and apply it to the spot for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the blood comes from the vein, and if it remains there for a few days, it will not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see anything of aloe or myrrh made into a poultice, a blister, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and swelling at the exit of the urethra; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you feel the spot soft to the touch under pressure, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid putting anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps it will go away without any artery being involved; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the strength of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for him who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, that one makes him a larger wound, and the flames are wider;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not piercing;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding the long or the wide vein.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for him whose body needs bleeding, one should give wet bread in pomegranate juice; if he is burning hot, [bleed him] three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if his complexion is cold, let him eat before bleeding soft bread dipped in muzed syrup, or in aromatic honey-syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he faints after the flow of much blood, let him breathe in the scent of warm meat broth and fine scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope for opening a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by a large bleed, that he bleeds little by little according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is a lot of blood inside the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; so one must draw out a large quantity, and widen the hole until it bleeds freely;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you must follow all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on their pulse while they bleed so that death does not come from the bleeding place,
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when the doctor is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it must not happen that when you see the arm loosening and blood coming out a second time, and the vein is closed, that you press firmly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if he is bent, that he extends his arm quickly, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him keep it until he heals the second time; or you touch it with the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein comes out,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on top of it .i. little piece of salt, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is reduced.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the vein turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let him be handled gently, so that the vein appears well, then he should be bled gently from across it, not from the top or bottom;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the wound be wide, and let him be bled close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, as one puts more into it in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the bleeding from this vein is safer than any other vein as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bleeding to save the right hand is useful for all diseases of the liver, and this is how to do it:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand, and pour in warm water until the vein is swollen, as much as they see;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it bleeds across, and if you bandage it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't go too deep, because the nerves are all stripped of flesh underneath.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The salve of poppies is good for all diseases beneath the skin,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the brain, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the intestines, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And its quality is such that the patient should pour it into hot water and rub it on the wound until it disappears,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the wound is at the ankle, and if it is on the leg, it will draw out many fluids from the leg;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then cut it at the ankle, or the Achilles tendon, whichever moves more easily.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it at the foot, then be careful of the nerves underneath, and cut it across as well as up and down; and let the flames go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the cautery fails the first time, then do it a second time higher up, because the place is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and likewise do with the other leg similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulsation extends to the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And its qualities are such that the patient feels pain between the buttocks and extends above the ankle in twisting .four times.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then you should pulse in all ways that you can, and by passing through;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better to cut it, for the nail is safe, and it is very tired from walking on foot.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, cut a vein in the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let the blood flow as you wish, and then untie the ligature, and place cotton on it and compress it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Bleeding with leeches:
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horn, or bronze, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction without striking is performed in two ways: either with all heat, or without heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and suction by striking and drawing blood is performed in the 14 parts of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	one is all in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and 2 others on either side of the neck; and a suction cup under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and a suction cup on the shoulders; and a suction cup above the kidneys;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the suction cups in between the 2 arms; and the suction cups in the 2 legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction cups on the ankles; and the ventilation does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason one weakens it not at all, just as is done with bleeding from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and one must not administer it at all, neither with any fire nor the sense of fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if from necessity due to illnesses, or because of habits, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they need to ventose, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if they experience swelling and redness on their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and others who spit up blood, have a swollen tongue, and bleed from their mouth;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if they experience hallucinations, seeing things that are not there, and suffering from fainting, bleeding, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it occurs during the night, we instruct them to drink a medicine after three hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches that come from the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of blood from the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation is in place of the bleeding of the head,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it should not be used by those with a cold complexion or a cough, as it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower down due to the risk of oblateness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The site for cupping is on the neck, at the junction of the head and the basilic vein, and therefore it is useful for constriction of the feet.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and for splitting of the canal of the lung, and for coughing, and for repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should be applied gently, because if it is pressed too firmly, it can cause oblateness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Ventilation of the two ribs in the neck is good for headaches, and eye pain, and migraine, and strangulation, and toothache.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	It is in the location of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand upon placing it so that he does not compress the artery, and cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the location of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the armpits is good for a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilation of the armpits is as much good as three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from those large vessels;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for beneath is bare bone, and underneath are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass that is placed on the hip is good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; and the cupping glass should be large and made of copper, which it needs to draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break and make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping on the legs heal very well, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and are effective for long-standing pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and for hernia; and they bring relief to swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is to first apply it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the color of blood appears; then release, and re-apply the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those with thin skin and clear pores: thus one should only pierce once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, one should pierce twice: the first time to subtilize the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, one should pierce a third time; and when we want to draw blood a little at a time, we only pierce once.Et se li sans est maigre, et les porez clers, si covient ferir tres foiz: car il ne peut sortir tout le gros sans que la voie ne soit subtiliée par traison du sang maigre.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, then we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, then we pierce it with a needle, and when the veins are such that they are suddenly pierced,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	it is appropriate for those who have thick and tough skin and have narrow pores that you anoint the places where the leeches will be applied with an opening and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in a state [of being pierced], use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the evening, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or of fennel, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the patient has soft flesh with large pores, no oil should be applied to it;
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but afterward wash it with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or water of pumpkin, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large swellings should drink old wine or clear water, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not good to bleed by cupping before the bath or the steam bath, but one hour or two after; and do not sleep after cupping,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is best to keep him warm when he should be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against the patient becoming colic-like, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he should press cool things, like pomegranates and endives and lettuces with garlic, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat small amounts, and charred food, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those of a cold complexion should drink honeyed syrup, and moderately aged, fragrant wine, and eat small birds and young pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than he eats;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or musk before or after a fart, to comfort the principal members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and make the drink subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leeches that are used without bleeding are those that are used on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the goiter, and on the stomach, and the gut, and the hips, because these members do not tolerate being bled on the eyes,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place sucking cups on the breasts when they are healthy to remove the viscousness in the member, as we place sucking cups on the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the swelling of the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and removes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it removes the obstruction or expels the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and so it acts when placed over the liver and over the abdomen when there is retained windiness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cups are administered empty to draw only; and sometimes with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in the case of diseases where there is phlegm, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has 2 inches in width and half a palm in depth, and on the side near the middle there is a small hole, as well as for pushing through a needle,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be made of copper, smooth in front so that it does not harm the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and has a rod of iron or steel placed diagonally in the middle, to hold a candle.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the leeches of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this leech on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or a lining, and put it inside the suction cup through the tube that is inside the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the body part, and your fingers should be on the hole we mentioned so that when you want to, the vapor will go in and out, and you remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and then apply the lining as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass which is administered for pneumonia, with all acute diseases, there is no tube or hole, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only.
et c’est li forme:	And this is how it works:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not removed until they have been applied to parts of the body where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in bare flesh, such as on the tongue or nipples, and other similar areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and its quality of use is such that when you find veins that are in clear, still water without any odor, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in fresh water, until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then cleanse the vein and bleed it, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full, and they will burst, if it is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, then do so, for it is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the site of the wound, and then with water, very gently, and then express it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the site of the bite is too far from the body's surface, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the swelling has spread, then apply ground vitriol, or salt, and similar things, until the swelling goes down;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half a handful of peeled peas on the site and leave them until they cool down, and it will stop swelling;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the leeches will not attach, then wipe the area with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the leech attaches.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then place them on the wound, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them defecating, then powder the wound with a mixture of aloe and salt, or ashes, and they will remain in place.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish people are speaking of this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing about it except from the study of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have gained knowledge from them, and from experience, and from my life's practice;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters in which the sage sets his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or a break occurs in anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient with cauterization from both sides, if nothing else helps, due to weakness of the body, or childhood, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the weather is very hot or very cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meat, and chicken and squirrel, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you suspect a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to their first course of treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one must feed the patient foods that promote swelling and stickiness, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with this swelling the bones will close up and heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot heal well or knit together according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too thin, like the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but have no care, reset the broken bone of the large tendons that extend and join the limb together, as much as it enforced it before; and do not touch any part of its work, and for this one must fatten on large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracturing.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in grinding, as with the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all over a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own reason and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone is due to twisting, and it is evident by displacement, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or sound when pressed, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but there may well be a crookedness, or crack, or small split.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but rather apply the remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that for a break in the arm, where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back into place evenly, just as with an abscess;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the abscesses drain, he should leave it for a day, until the abscesses are soothed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then reset it to its proper place as quickly and smoothly as possible, knowing that the restoration of the joint is easier than the restoration of one with broken bones; then hold it steady, as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces of bone, if it is in two parts, whether hand or foot, or the hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and reset the joint according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the bone are brought together, you reset it with all your skill and care, making sure not to cause any further injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two ends of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then dress it nicely, and do not pull or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contraction in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is healed, then instruct the patient carefully not to move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and be sure that the member is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, then it is not ready, and you should put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure it is placed correctly so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members like fingers, toes, and the like; so one should wrap them in soft, slender linen.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those who are large, like the thigh and leg: they should be wrapped with a wide and sturdy bandage, for a wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and constrains it from every side equally, so that there is no swelling.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie around it light sponges, 3 or 4 times depending on the limb, and constrict the hand a little at all the bandage, then go above the dislocation and constrict less, so that the dislocation then moves away a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage little by little, as you press on most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it around again directly over the dislocated area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the part below the dislocation and constrict it slightly, not too strong or too weak, as we have said above in the first bandage.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the lines, wads of linen or bandages, until it is all even, then tie it all tightly with a bandage above, and then put your well-made stars on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot that soothes the abscess above and reduces the swelling, leave it like this for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch it over your stars and make them half the width of a large cane, or of wood used to make cleavers, or palm fronds, and arrange them in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, it is necessary for the star that one places over the break to be somewhat larger than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as is appropriate for the size of the limb, small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten it over the splints just as you did at first, then tie it firmly with a thread in the same way as before over the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, and made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the thread is thick, as I have seen fools make cords from tightly twisted flax, it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded in the head after the stretching of his legs while healthy, then place under them linen pads or other soft cloth so that he does not get hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment for this later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to stretch all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, one should not apply splints until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the severity of the swelling and hot abscesses;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: you take flour that is held on the walls of the mill, and cook it with an egg-abundance, and place this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common way of the plaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially women and young children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and twist: take 3 barley and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10; myrrh and aloes, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder of them, and mix it with egg-abundance; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is useful for twists: take mastic and viscud, each 10; myrrh and aloes, each 8; acacia 6; armenic vitriol 10, and grind well, and cook with water or egg-abundance, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of plaster for joints and the bones out of their places, and it soothes the pain thereafter, and reduces the size of the bone, and restores the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, and place it on the area. These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way of making a plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce swelling of an abscess: take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; crush and cook with wine. If the member is burned, cook it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way of making a stronger plaster than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member: take marshmallow root, flax seed, borage, milk thistle, and Saint John's wort, and violet and chamomile flowers; take an equal amount of each and crush, and cook with salty water, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its comfort.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems according to Galen that one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair cut short, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and crush them, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor the bone move from its place; if not, loosen it again after several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the area, or itching, loss of appetite or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge from the sea moistened, and plunge in water, and lift up the area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it to a nut, until you are sure the abscess is hot;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and the pain is gone, then start the gentle binding again, and a little ointment, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then do it again, just as you did before.Et se il n’est pas sanez, et il ne te veult bien estraindre, si covient qu’il soit osté dou membre et mis en autrui lieu, et li membre ben liien et ben reposé.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not heal and the patient refuses to be bound, then it must be removed from the limb and placed in another place, and the limb should be well bound and rested. And sometimes it is left for 20 days or longer, depending on what one observes, until the break has healed and the flesh has grown closer together.et li membre ben liien et reposé selonc la maniere que nous avon dit; car il adest maintes foiz que l’ostement ne s’aert pas tant sobtoit, et il doit demorer longuement.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then restrain it more than before, and increase the amount of food it eats, as I have said earlier; and if you see its place becoming drier than is necessary, know that no healing can come from that.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then use hot water to wash it, every time you loosen it, and do this every third day, and leave it for a while.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	through this work, the healing of the limb is shortened, and gently eases what the foolish person does, which is to restore the limb that has been tortured: it is malicious, and such work is fearful, and I see no other way but to persevere and do it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of fractures:
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, with various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the way to the sinus which is under the bone, as in a cut or a blow from a staff; and this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two types of fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow with a bladed weapon, or a split or from the collarbone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a broken bone piercing through to the membrane below the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is placed in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, and because of this the break is called "capillary."
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made by stone or fall or similar thing, and it drives the bone piece inward, and the place is hollow like a potter when he makes pots on the potter's wheel; then the bone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their heads, like a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged as described above; I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we shall know all kinds of fractures through examination, and through the corruption that is upon them, and through the foulness that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, if the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of the signs of illness, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a fearful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the patient comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should remove the tooth before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hurry to remove the tooth before the seventh day, so that the gum beneath the tooth does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have described occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break in the bone comes just to the gum that covers the brain, then you should split the broken part thus: and it is that you press the head of the patient with the navel, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on top of the wound more gently than you can,
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if blood flows when the bone is exposed, or an abscess drains, help him as it is proper to do, and you must fill the wound with wet rags soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the abscess is drained and bleeding stopped; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of operation: one method is that you cut tightly in front, and it is shaped as follows:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger cut than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work gently so you do not bleeding the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer cauteries with needles, not deep enough to pierce through to the other side of the bone, and there should be a rim or circle at the tip, preventing the needle from going beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all occasions. And this is the form of cauteries in three ways:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the bone are that you place a needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the needle to another spot a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone with your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, like tongs or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is appropriate that you resect the membrane which is attached to the bone with any similar instrument to an incision, but it must be more flexible and finer than the other incision;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	if it dislodges nothing but the small bones and no scales, then gently draw them out with instruments; then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you shall place under the head of this lens-shaped incision, from which the fracture has occurred, in order to cut it.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Do not cut from one side only, as the fracture is on both sides, so that the cutting instrument is directed towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet upon it, so that you slightly chip away at the bone all around, taking care to avoid the membrane below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is dislocated at the bone, then the bone must be gently moved, for one can move the bone without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp which you should have in various sizes, in order to adapt it to each location according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take a large rasp first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other subtle cuts and fractures, one must adapt it according to its nature; and this is not something that can be easily done by one who has not dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the ulcer is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another folded cloth in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the ulcer, then apply pressure above with another ligature, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove the ligature and apply remedies such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologus, and similar things; and make a powder from these ingredients and place it on the wound, and then apply other remedies that do not cause biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and make sure the wound is clean and dry, that you do not leave any ointment on it, or allow any pus to collect, because when pus collects under the membrane of the brain, it causes great harm; for when one applies something biting to the wound, it causes numbness above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come but because of the medicine that has been placed on it, then such virtue has it, you must take a part of honey, and .iiij. parts of rose oil, and glue .i. bandage, and put it on the ulcer;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two bones above are broken, either by themselves or with the one below, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should insert your little finger or a needle into the break, and hold it steady with your index finger, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nail, and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you must use the end of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and be quick to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then attach to the head of the tent made of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach another one on another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some say that the tents should be moistened in butter, and changed every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they should be moistened in egg white, and ground flour; then leave the tent, until the bone is healed, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they attach goose feathers instead of tents, and around it a thin cloth, and the patient holds the fracture, and breathes in the medicine; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put a poultice of rose oil or in a little diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if hot abscesses don't come, then put a poultice on the nose, made from flour of sisament, and powdered incense, cooked in egg white. Then put it on light sponges and do not bind the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the nose is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with appropriate instruments for this purpose. Then cut the wound and treat it with healing things made from warm charcoal and plaster, as well as appropriate ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents and put in splinters of willow tree, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no external wound, and the break is only out of place, and not broken in two, so that it curves inside, then one can easily tell.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right part, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently push the break back into place, and adjust it with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is separated by one-sixth, then you should administer an extension of one-sixth, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then they are restrained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then apply cerotum to the broken jaw and place a double fold of cloth over it; and place a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw has changed shape, then loosen it on the third day and reset it to its proper position; and apply a poultice over it made of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sisamum flour, after having removed the cerotum; and place a light lamb's wool poultice over that, and if the poultices start to rot, and the condition of the patient does not change, then leave them as long as it takes for the patient to recover; many have recovered within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses develop, then administer what we have already said many times.Et se il a contusion sus la mandibule, si met sus cerote, et sus le cerote lainne legiere, et li estele longes; et se li estele s’aert, met ainche sus lainne legiere, si come tu oges li contusions; et adonques covient il que li disloque la mandibule a leu.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a break and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it a suitable poultice to promote healing.
de la forcele	of the armpit
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks several times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, with pieces, and is the easiest to heal; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is, when there is no wound with the fracture, to have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side. Then, using your fingers, bring the fracture into alignment so that it is set correctly and there is no displacement or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need more extension, place a round pillow made of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient; then lift and lower the collarbone, holding the pillow in your hand, so that you set the fracture correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the assistants should lift the shoulder from below, so that the collarbone bone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it broken, you must split it open; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined because of an overhang, then use one of the incisions you have made to insert this instrument beneath the bone to push out the splinter:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and is shaped like a spoon, and is not sharp, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two handles, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the nature of the wound that you have made when you split the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the incision is small, or if you doubt that it is a hot abscess, pack the wound with bandages and dressings according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil, garlic, and wine, and place it over the wound:
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The stretching of the bone, when there is no wound or fracture, is to place upon the bone the plaster made from mill-dust and egg white, and place light bandages on top, and insert a sponge under the elbow if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide bandage, about a palm-width, and place two folded pieces of cloth on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a thin strip, three digits in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs loose.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the strip over the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in place satisfactorily, and you clearly see that the strip is not moving over the broken bone, then loosen the ligature and restrain it again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder, so as to ease the fracture by aligning the shoulder; or bind the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless a bad accident happens, for up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then resume the poultice, if you see that it is needed, and hold it there until he is healed; and she is usually healed within 28 days, but some men recover more quickly.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of a shoulder dislocation
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated near its joint without being noticed except by touch; then adjust it according to the pattern of the break and reset it according to its natural shape, in every way you can; then put on the wound powder from the mill with an egg white, and apply light dressings, and place over it a double piece of cloth; then put over that a large and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is swelling anywhere under the shoulder, apply that swelling with linseed poultices so that the splint lies evenly; then bind it firmly with a broad bandage, so that the splint does not move from its position, and check the binding every day. And whenever it becomes loose, rebind it, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; the shoulder is usually healed within 20 to 25 days. And when this time is up, remove the binding, and be careful, for it is not a bone that can be reset easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone has come out in front and is not under the collarbone, cut it away, and do as we have said before about heating the abscess to ease the pain.Et si li espaule est desaloiee par cause de moistor, et on la remet en son leu, et elle ne puet demorer en son leu, si revient adés et desalue par petit mouvement qui avient; si doit on la disloquer premierement, et puis la ramonyer.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but that seldom happens; it more often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downward, and causes great pain to the patient, and a deficiency of meat, and vomiting, and perhaps bleeding, and the hair grows in the broken bone, and he feels it very much.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders together, and brings the ribs together with his hands, and carefully tries to make the bone even in all ways he can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then he applies plasters and poultices made from subtle salt, or other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it onto the broken bone, so that it does not move; and winds the bandage around the back again, and tightens it gently, and checks every hour if it has softened, and if so, he tightens it; and if he needs to loosen it for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain, or an abscess, then he should hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come from various cures; then he re-applies the plaster and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in the large ones after the back, and in the head within, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels well on examination at the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you place the fracture evenly, as it should be. And then apply the ointment and compress it with a bandage, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as well as a feeling of pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; and he has a cough, and is hoarse, and vomits a large amount of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients considered it dangerous.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make any incision unless an abscess is hot, if it has not become so already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has become so, then we lance it to let out the pus and the unhealthy matter.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the affected area to draw out the excess fluids, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cupping glass may attract unhealthy fluids due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	Some say that one should cover the affected area with warm, moist wool and place tenting between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around; then it should be treated with a poultice of pleurisy root, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pokes through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the location of the broken rib, and one should place underneath a instrument to ward off the syphilis; and then one must split the bone, and gently pull, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals. And if hot abscesses come, then moisten cloths in rose oil and place on the location; and while curing the area that needs to be cured for the abscess, let him lie carefully on his side where he should, until he heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	If the bones of the neck are broken, then one must split the neck in the break and place an instrument on the break, and go gently if life is at risk. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, pay attention if you see their hands soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that there are many dispositions where it is fatal, and if they can move and feel the pain when you stretch them, know that the joint of the bone is saved and that the patient will be healed if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take note if the feet are numb, and if there are signs of injury in the arms, and when lying on his back he passes wind and evacuates bowels involuntarily; and when he lies on his belly, he also evacuates bowels involuntarily. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that this is deadly: do not labor over his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is more minor.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, using rose oil or egg yolk until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, then cover the wound with a bandage; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, and treat it with ointment until it is healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder blade," place your left hand's thumb in your right hand as tightly as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage it, if necessary; then bind it, and if there are exposed bones, put them back in, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally, the bone of the hip may fracture, and if it does, there will usually be some shortening at the head; and it feels long, and tilts to the side, causing pain, and puncturing and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the break, so that it aligns with the fracture; and you identify where the fracture is, and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then you put it back into alignment, so that it has a natural shape again.Et si li brisure est a la queue soulement, et que li chief soit en son leu, si met cele brisure en son leu natureil, tant qu’ele ne se mueve plus; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient dolor al leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it tilts inwards, then have the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the fracture can be prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it in its place, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the poultice under the armpit, until the limb is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful bumps appear, do not touch them until the painful bumps are healed, and then apply what we have described earlier; and then return to restoration, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad incident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what is between the armpit and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a straight stick of moderate thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Tie the two ends of the stick with strings, and bend them upward, and have the patient sit on a chair; then let him lift his broken arm onto the stick, until it reaches the end, and place a crook on the stick, then lean over some heavy object or have an assistant hold him down; then bring the ends of the broken bone together in alignment with both hands, until the break is set as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lean forward onto his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two assistants, one to pull upward on what is above the break with both hands, and the other to pull downward at each end of the stick, pulling in opposite directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, then tighten one string under the break and one above it, pulling in opposite directions. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should place one string underneath the socket and one towards the armpit, over the break; and likewise, if the break is towards the armpit, then place a light string gently without exerting force, until the bone is aligned with its joint, and then align the break so that it sits correctly in its socket. If there are no abscesses, then tighten and hold it in place.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a deep abscess comes, do not drain it for seven days, and put soft lamb's wool in the hollow, and rose oil, until the deep abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and lay a cloth, and drain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless something dislocates it, or the bone moves.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and put a larger and stronger splint over the break, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to stick out three inches on either side of the break; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less in distance.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the splints and the drainage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the deep abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot return to the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, then dislocate it after three or more days; and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place beneath the shoulder a plain woolen cushion evenly, and watch every hour of the day or night that the broken limb's shape does not move or its bandage become loose; then treat him with medicine and give him the meat we mentioned earlier, so that the meat is first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days of each other; then one should dislocate and administer baths and medicated ointments to direct the healing. And if the dislocation is severe and swollen, it should remain dislocated for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'ulna' and the 'radius'. The ulna is smaller and is located near the armpit; the radius is larger and is located below, towards the little finger. Sometimes only the ulna breaks, sometimes only the radius, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing are easier; but if the large bones are broken, their healing is more difficult and painful than when they are both broken together. If only a small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, then it must be pulled harder; and extend it over a pillow, and have the wrist of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient cross their arms over themselves, and a pillow in front of them so they do not feel any discomfort; then the assistant extends the arm of the minister towards the part underneath his hand, or one minister above, and another minister below. And then set the bones straight according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one back in its proper location; and if there is any dislocation, hold the heart, and reset the bone as we have described earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if the fracture has caused an open wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; so take care with that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, then apply .i. cloth of cerotemade of rose oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard or too soft; and bind .i. cloth over it gently, until the abscesses are soothed. And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of the mill powder with egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that he must have vi bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in both; and bind tighter over the fracture than elsewhere, and always looser as time goes on, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the string with which it is bound be made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And review the limb and the ligature after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wet the limb with hot water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest without being bound. And then restart the binding, and if the ligature becomes loose or the bones slip out of place, then adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you see that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days, until the nutrients flow, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things we have said happen to the patient, do not release him until .20 days are past, or until he has a fever, then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in .30 days or .35, and by chance in .20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from manyfold folds.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or folded, one must have the patient stretch his neck and hold it straight in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on a flat surface, and extends the minister the broken bones, and makes them even with each other, then he puts on a plaster and bandages, if no abscesses come, then he puts on a splint according to the quantity of the break; and it is wrapped in 1 piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, then make a ball of rags, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken plant; and then pull it with a long cloth, and the stamp of wax as big as the palm of the hand, and hold it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you should put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of the fingers of the hand, and it is the knuckle, then hold it even, as it should be; and hold it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, then hold it even, and tie the wounded finger to the healthy one next to it; or tie them all together while holding them, so that they do not move, or put a splint on top, as in the knuckle; and take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and treat those that come up, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it well when they move forward and backward; and their restoration is such that one ties a bandage above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band evenly to its respective part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the break. And likewise, if it is near the knee, then the band should be beyond the knee, and the extension should be below; then the physician should bring the bone back to its natural position with his two hands, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if the break is between the bone and the flesh, then the bandage should be above the break, and the extension below; and apply the ointment under the bandage.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a bandage around the fracture. Take a double-folded, thick bandage and tie it around the leg, leaving some excess material; then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, just below the knee, so that the ends of the thread come out at the top. Then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, and place a splint on the fracture, and another splint on the shinbone; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabric to ensure the pressure is even, then start to tie the bandage firmly in three or four places around the fracture. The tighter you tie it above the fracture, and looser below, the better; then take hold of the two ends of thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the thread, so that you come just under the foot; tighten it so that it does not move, then leave it as it is until there is no swelling or bruising.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is a break in the bone that can be seen, then it should be opened and cleaned as we have said many times before. If there is an impaled object in the wound, then it should be removed if possible; if not, then the area around it should be split open and the object pulled out. The wound should then be treated as we have described, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thighbone can be broken like this when splints are placed on it, as can happen in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, the patient will not be cured by this treatment alone.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the hip is restored in one day or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	You shall know that there is little fracture in the groove of the knee, but it bends many times. And if it fractures, it is only a single break, and it happens with and without wound, and it feels good to both.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And its restoration is to put it back into place, as much as it can be put back into place, then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; then treat each incident as it occurs, so that it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You should know that in the leg there are two bones; one is properly called the "tibia," and the other is called the "fibula." All types of fractures occur in the leg as they do in the arm, and so the treatment is the same, and the procedures are identical.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg will be turned completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are fractured, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and it turns underneath. Then administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and ease it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down to underneath; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a basket as long as the leg, made of wood, and they place the leg to prevent movement, and properly do they apply this in the fracture where there is injury; and move the leg every day, to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the metatarsal bones there can sometimes be a fracture, and it occurs in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the arch of the foot, then bind it tightly to the foot in the appropriate manner, and then wrap cloth around it, and other things you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if one or more of the toes are broken, reset them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly larger; then place under the foot the board I mentioned earlier, and bind it tightly in place. If there is more than one toe that is broken, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrap each one in a separate piece of linen, and bind the board under the foot. Let the top of the board press firmly against the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And be sure to remember the other things we have said about other fractures, for each type of fracture requires a different treatment.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break in the bone of the elbow
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's natural bone is broken, she should be made to sit up and lean forward, then held from behind. Then fill the vagina with cotton and place a stone as big as an egg inside it; then make the woman stand, and gently lift her back a little at a time, causing the cotton to come out as far as the entrance of the vagina, and the bone will return with the stone. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back again. Do this for seven days; then the break will be restored. If you wish, take a lamb's bladder, attach a tube to the opening, and fill the bladder inside her; then blow into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside her: the bone will return to its place. Then fill her with cotton and leave it there for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the elbow is broken, in man or woman, it is restored as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves to the study of medicine, and understand my book. For the break indicates to them many dispositions toward the right way of restoration: listen to them therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from a break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that they be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the dislocation in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then leave it until the third or fourth day, as long as the abscesses are relieved; do not touch it on the second day, nor the third, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently touch it with your hands, making small movements.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not become equal in your hands, then prepare this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its thickness depends on the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary to apply it with pressure, three or four times, according to what is needed in each case of a broken bone; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under the compression on the affected limb due to your work, and it should be sharp at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a «paladin», because the curved head of the shoulder should be placed on the visible end of the bone; and press it once, so that it returns to its place and becomes equal. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you should cut the end of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, according to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its proper place, then soak a cloth in black, acidic wine and apply it gently and cleanly to the area; do not put cerot or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption. Then administer leeches once you have reset the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover everything around it according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage. Many fools have done this and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient; and let the constriction be looser and softer than other bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is serious or large and you doubt that an evil accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not use leeches on it; but wrap around it, instead of leeches, tough bandages and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you put on it completely and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they go astray for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps going back and forth, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, then it should be treated according to what he said in his chapter earlier. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder and similar large limbs, do not draw it out, because many die from that; but let it be until it protrudes after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come on the healing site
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the break there comes health to the bone, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore when the nose is blocked: let the medicine be astringents such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, and other similar substances, which you grind into a powder with wine, egg white or garlic; put it on the nostril in a bandage, tie it tightly, and leave it for several days; then remove it and start again, until the blockage is gone. You can also use a well-prepared piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the blockage has turned hard like a stone, and you need to remove it, cut it away, and make the surplus skin visible; or have it removed by a surgeon, so that it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you cause the patient to eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and pleasure; then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great coldness, and often wet it with warm water, so that the coldness runs into the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb bent after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are bent after recovery, and the broken bones appear, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land, and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are recent, then they should be wetted with hot water or herbs that soften them, such as leaves of plantain, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften quickly. You take the mucilage of plantain, and cook it with tallow or sesame oil, and make an ointment to apply to it; or you take ripe figs, and pound them with colon dung, and similar medicines.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the dislocation is cured by rubbing continually and for a long time with wet hands. And movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut it open to the bone, with a sharp knife lightly; and put cotton wool and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, one must immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the area will swell and, if one tries to reset it, it may cause pain. Therefore, one should not move it when it is swollen, as this can bring on spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscesses are drained; then apply warm water and oil to the affected area, gently reset the dislocation, and treat each limb as the healing progresses back to its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws become dislocated, and there are two types of double dislocation: they are slightly displaced from their place and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the feet, causing saliva to flow from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, and the tongue is wrapped around speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it can be treated with various remedies.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it quickly and not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if it is a double dislocation; and the other fingers are relaxed, so that they may be equal; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he applies the cautery evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is of the two jaws together, treat it with hot water and oil, gently flexing them until they are reset; do not force the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place wet rags coated in rosin ointment made from oil and wax over it, then bind it gently with soft ligatures.Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, and do not force him to talk, but give him soft food until the pain is relieved and the jaws are bound together.Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not bother to open your mouth to eat and drink as long as the jaw is well-bandaged and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fevers and usual sores come, and possibly stomach problems, and possibly vomiting clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The foreskin cannot be cured by cauterization near the glans or foreskin, and sometimes it is cured by cauterization further away, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the ointment and bandage, and bind it tight.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if it can, and if it is dislocated once, then put it back in place as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in the same way, the shoulder of the spine is returned when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	You know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is from the part of the axilla below; and the second is from the part of the foot; and occasionally it is dislocated from above, which seldom happens.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the axilla, especially in those who are thin; but in those who are plump, it dislocates at the edges and goes back in at the edges.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some people that they experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will know of a dislocation when it is downward towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them:
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as though it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not difficult to correct when it is new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the assistant to lift the hand of the patient up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upwards in its place; while the assistant lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then places it down; this will work quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the assistant should apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of fennel and fenugreek and marsh-mallow in water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the assistant should rub the patient's back, and place a soft lamb's wool pad underneath the shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then the assistant places their heel on the pad, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the sick person so that it does not move; then the shoulder will return immediately and if you see to reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and you should have a man present who is taller than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the side of the patient, and press his shoulder under the armpit of the sick person, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister pulls the hand of the sick person down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is reset in another way too: insert a long rod into the ground, so that the end of the rod is at the same level as a fist, and neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be upright and steady; then extend their hand down on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return due to all the things we have said, then do this cure: take a stick that is two yards long and four digits wide, with a pointed end to pierce through under the shoulder blade, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it to the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not hurt the patient; then place it under the shoulder blade of the patient; and extend their arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the arm, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a board that is wide enough, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere that is equal in size, then apply the prepared plaster of mill powder with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the shoulder blade gradually, and tie the string onto the plaster, and hold the hand to their neck, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should eat little, until the limbs are comfortable, for then he will heal faster; and then to eat more after .v. days or .vii., and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔软, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of place due to moisture that it acquired, or for any other reason, then you should apply cautery to it in three places, as described earlier in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after .vii. days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation which is towards the foot, and in the breasts, or behind, is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers to it otherwise; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou col, et les mameles, si est faite per impulsion et estendement de mains, et on li met autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb, and with movement it is delayed, then let the patient use the bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	from dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated all over, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reset it as soon as the abscess comes out, because if the abscess comes out, it will be painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration, when it can be reset, is to extend his arm with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands turned towards you according to the joint, both inside and outside, and press the joint of his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and stretches from the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then strong extension is administered; and there are two ministers who extend the arm, and another two ministers who stretch it, so that it does not move during the extension; then the arm is turned from each side after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he puts his hand on the joint, if he anoints it with oil to loosen the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it goes back.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is back in place, put dry plaster on the egg white, and press it firmly, and wind the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, then start again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly in place; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is put back in place and it moves, then bathe and rub him nicely, and press until he is relieved; then you can put a fat sheep's ice pack on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and have him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the bandage again, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that, put warm cow's dung with butter on it, and apply it to the area; it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is easier than other joints, nevertheless, it must be reset gently, at the same time as when it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reset is that you put the affected hand on a table, and one person extends the hand while another person pulls it gently, so that the palm falls on the appearance of the joint, and they stretch until it returns to place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right position; then put the patient's hand on a table for extension and flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand on the table, and the examiner puts his hand over that part of the joint. If it goes back into place now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing poultices to calm abscesses, and leave it like that without changing anything.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will remain misaligned.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and it does not harm the patient before the hand is weakened and unable to grasp anything: then you will know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to constrict by fire cautery from the case, and by chance nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then constrict it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il en a une grante, si le remede est que li mains se tienne au chaud sus la grieteit, et qu’il soit eslongeit tant qu’il soit sanez; car li membres longes sont plus tost sanaiz que li courts.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	At times, they are dislocated on either side of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the palm itself.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then grab the finger and bend it at the joint until it is reset, then hold the head of the finger and point it towards the affected joint.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	Let it be for a day and a night, then straighten it the next day. Tie it up as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and tie it at night. Do this often until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is healed. And do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the skull from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the skull at the back or neck is dislocated, there are several dislocations, and there is no cure, for death hastens the illness.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the digestive system expels its contents without voluntary effort, and it cannot hold them in, and often a limb is paralyzed, or both legs, or an arm.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the skull mutates in four parts; that which mutates at the back is called "gypsy":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the cure if it is that you reward if the disease has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing from it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients described great remedies in many words, but they did not always bring much benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the disease that comes from the feet forward, there is no healing or health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also one who comes directly to both sides, and cannot be cured unless he comes properly from the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and that the patient be stretched out flat on his face in one place equally, and have a restraint below him so that he does not bleed.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then thrust a hot iron into the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two servants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two irons;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well closed, the embers as we have said, and the mirror should put his palms on the spine, until it regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not regain consciousness with this treatment, then take a table three yards long, and place it under the wall, and let the patient lie on their side, and place the end of the table under the spine, then put the middle of the table on the spine:
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and let the mirror put their feet on the other end of the table and press firmly until it regains consciousness; and if you see that it is turning to one side, then turn it back to the center.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should insert two embers at the head of the patient's arm, and two more by their feet, with a palm width of space between each ember, both above and below:
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and in each stake there is a hole, into which the cord winds, and the stakes are firmly driven into the ground so that they do not move; and between every two stakes there is a winding stake, around which the cord winds, and in every turning stake there are two small stakes of a palm's length, for turning the cord;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the cord which is between the stakes to the turning stake towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each of the ministers turns his cord all along the line, and the master straightens the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with yolk of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a board three digits long, which covers the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a cord as we have said, and use the patient's subtle medicine until he is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes of it in the end, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one believes it to be a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, so one must not have any presumption about it: by chance it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only come about as dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and most inside, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the affected knee appears more than the healthy one, and the affected one cannot bend their knee over fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the place that is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes in defense, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who happens in front, it is that his leg is well according to the fulfillment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who happens behind, it is that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it persists according to its nature, then there should be no treatment; and it must not have any presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint to its place, and stretch it both inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and will not need further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a strong bandage, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one hand tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another person stretches his hand above it in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls him with a strong rope above the thigh; and another pulls on his head with a rope;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension applies to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, you must pay attention to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and at the point below the armpit; then extend the bandage upwards towards the armpit and towards the underarm.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then have another assistant grasp his arms and tightly embrace the large part of the dislocated thigh, and extend it forcefully in the correct direction; then it will return to its place immediately. This manner of dislocation is more gentle than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong leather thong above the heels and above the knees, and let the affected leg be extended two spans more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with two arm-lengths of distance from the ground; then command one minister to grab the top of the thigh, and another minister hanging with the patient to grab the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is healed, then let the patient lie as we have said in the case of those with gout, and tie one bandage on the affected leg properly, and another on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two embers, one at the head and one at the foot, then thrust an ember between the thighs at the site of the dislocation.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and has moistened bandages placed around it so that it does not blister the patient, then extend each limb towards him, and the assistant places their hand flat over the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, lie the patient on a table and press him as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let him lie on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and let the assistant put their weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push it down towards the knee.If the limb is not extended, then take a staff and place it under the limb, and lift it up until the dislocation goes back into place. If that does not work, then cut through the clothes and press directly on the joint.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the back, then one should not extend or lift the affected limb upwards, but it should be positioned as if the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said regarding lying on one's side with both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and hold them in place with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then hold it in place as before and leave it for 3 days; then loosen it and have him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	On dislocation of the knee:
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take their knee in your palms and pull it gently towards you between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and have another minister extend their foot while you hold their leg straight, until the knee returns to its place; and the sign is that they straighten their leg at the thigh easily;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on top, and make the leg air out at the thigh, and tie them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and the patient should not work until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not straight, then apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender to the touch in the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the return should be gentle, and the shoulder gently extended with the hands when only the shoulder joint is dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from all sides, you should have the patient sit upright and hold him with one hand by the leg above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and press the foot firmly upwards;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this two times as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back in, that's good; if not, then restart the procedure, for it will go back in.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if he cannot go back in like that, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and press a stick firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he does not slide;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then one minister pulls the thigh, and another extends the foot with his hands or with a rope, tying it to the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister stretches equally, and the stick is placed between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place when he is stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then let the surgeon hold the dislocation in his hands evenly, and another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return smoothly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, put the plaster and padding on top, and stretch it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so that the binding is not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, stretch it again; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business in four days.Et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par  .iiij. jors;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it loosens again, stretch it again; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient can go about their business in four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.Et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a deep abscess forms, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the armpit
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without force, and that is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the body below the waist or below the leg, you must make the patient lie on his back on a flat surface or table with his legs straight, and then press firmly on his feet until it pops back into place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two notches, then pull it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things use hot poultices for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb in place so that the hot abscesses may heal;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then minister hot poultices for abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be done, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small broken bones, then set the bones, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will cause you to go astray according to your Creator, and for the sake of your arms and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here ends the romance of physics
