Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, to complete its consequence in it, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have fulfilled that for you at this treatise, which is a part of my operation with my own hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with my own hand has been spread throughout our region and in our time, all private; so that few people have perused the science of it, and its vision is lost; and there remain no remnants of it except some petty descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you come to the forms of the ferraments of cautery and other instruments of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no artificial limb has been found in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it covers the skillful actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy which reconstructs Galen, until he knows the junctions of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their relation; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their movement.
And for this Hippocrates said that a name is motion, mostly in small work, and greatly in the art of the hand.
We have already said that about him in the introduction of this book; because who does not know what we have said about anatomy, does not evacuate that he will not fall into error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and get away from that science and its experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incidentally induced an scrophilous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and incidentally cut some arteries of the neck so that great bleeding occurred until the woman almost died among his hands.
And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, he was conscious under it that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he gave to a black craftsman whose duty was to break the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he destroyed the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and stitches in a strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And I followed the dislocations according to their desires, and I followed the reliefs, and I followed the treatments for several days and commanded that they not dislocate the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and foot were affected by apostema, and he went to perdition.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and he was unable to dislocate the limb, and he achieved tranquility and thus relieved his pain.
But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be refrained, and it did not cease to walk around the corruption in the limb until the patient suffered.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and he ulcerated for several days, until the malignity of it was magnificent in his lord's sight.
The reason is that the cancerous humor is pure melancholy, then it does not cover that it will not come to him at all, but rather it is in the member which suffers from everything, as if it were held by all.
And for this, sons, it is necessary that the operation with my own hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work in which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where I found opposition in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And then take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are fallen and are confirmed.
And you will follow the best way for the grace of God, leading to salvation and laudable success, and you will leave the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you will put away your arms from what makes you fear, so that you may have faith in your heart and in your name you may not be evasive: because more remains in your glory, and thus also in the world and afterwards among your sanctities.
Because the disease has been located in certain moist places: "Not to medicate bad patients badly, so that bad doctors are not named."
"And I have devoted this book to three sections."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the primary partition." "The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrumens of the cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second partition." "The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on poultices, and on extraction of arrows and on similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments."
"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of twisting and on similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of the instruments."
"I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complex situation it is prohibited to use cauteries."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of the cautery and of its instrument is a long and prolix sermon, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me it seems enough to take a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
"Therefore I say that cauteries universally confer to all complex situations the quality of matter or its matter, except for two complex situations, which are complex situations devoid of matter."
"In the complex situation of dry and withered matter they disagree; for some said that cauteries are useful for that, and others said the contrary, that cauteries are not convenient in a bad illness which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a bad illness, dry and withered, may be healed."
"And they say that one who says the contrary of that, that by cauteries it is made useful in all bad dry and withered illnesses that are seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complex situation of fire, you find the body of man to be cold."
"And I say by the sermon of that one, that I have already experimented and discovered many times at my own expense."
"Moreover, I do not know that it comes over that one who has already been experimented and experienced in the chapter of cauteries by last exercise, and to have known the diversity of the complex situation of men and the disposition of illnesses in their metesises, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those."
"Moreover, in the other complex situations, it is not about your fear, and mainly in the cold and humid illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree about the usefulness of cauteries in those."
"And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cauteries is fire and its goodness, so concerning cauteries, it is a comburent medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is adjusted with a small benefit."
"Moreover, the action of comburent medicine reaches to that in the members which are near it, and strengthens them to come into the ailing member with difficult healing and strengthens them to listen."
"Moreover, fire, by its sublime quality and good substance, does not do anything but superfluously, and it is already known to us through experiment and long duration of service in the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have been excused from the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this passage to you secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion by which it expels illnesses, a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acquiesced in your pestilent pages."
"And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to use cauteries and pause at the best time of spring."
"And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the usefulness of that which I have with cauteries, and mainly if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and steady, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared that those who bring evil may come, which is more than a small harm entering at that time."
"And thus I do not cater to your pestilent pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that illness which is healed by cauteries, it is not returned at all times, and they pause at that consequence."
And the cause is not so because the doctors do not burn in that place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause for why pains occur.
Maybe the emperor's cautery is excessive on the medicine to demonstrate his worth and virtue of his operation and greatness of his lordship.
And it is possible that his illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and his virtue, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of excesses in him, and what has happened to him in his acquisition of vices and semblances of those causes; but that the illness on which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few excesses and humors, thus as cautery of tooth for pain and semblance to that, it is possible that in him there does not return that pain, rather what happens in a small way.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine or another cause that profits from cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not but when they administer the manifold ways of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer thus cautery, and it profits from that. And henceforth I will say that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as if it were not absolutely virtuous, because you have already tried it and experienced that it does not do so except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but when you perform cautery with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust it over the ignition, the gold melts from the focus, and sometimes in the focus certain layers are formed so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
And for this reason, it is done to burn with iron instead of gold, we put it more lightly and more proximally to the rectitude of operation.
And I have now ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I may give to the demanding one what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corrissa, from the head to the parts of the veins and arteries flowing, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and semblance in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate with medicine laxative the whole head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then to sit between his thighs on a curved bench and to place his hands on his chest.
And then he places the razor of his palm then he puts it on the razor of the nose between his eyebrows. Maybe emperor, as the finger said of my own place is happened, it signifies that place with a probe, and then ignites the olive wood cautery of which this is the form:
And then he places it on the sensitive place with a probe, in a way that descends, at which the finger of the hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
And then he lifts his hand lightly and regards the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then he lifts his hand, and if it does not turn his hand to that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the bone what I have said to you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it there for three days.
And then he places it on the burned area in a bandage and leaves it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then he cures the place with four-drug ointment until it is healed.
And I said that when the Roman plague spreads, it is better to take the arm, because it is more helpful and brings greater joy.
I instructed that some of those who need to be cauterized on the back of the bone, and hold the cautery inside until it reaches a certain part of the vertebrae.
Then return to the water that is adjusted to the bone, and then be cured.
I instructed others that I would apply the cautery to the back, until it penetrates into the bone with strong impression until the bone breaks, and this is the method of healing small fractures. And I estimate that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
And it has been held by the spreading plague for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two species of cauteries at all, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you must, better is my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned thus we have testified in the other members, and especially since the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first species of cauteries is most safe and better for me; and from that house and I do that work, I am healthy.
It follows accordingly.
About the cautery of the head.
When the entire head is afflicted with chronic and long pain and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of poultices and bandages and head-wraps and plasters and ointments and catheters and girdles, and especially if already cauterized by a cautery that I recount and does not apply to any of those causes, then consider that the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and atrophied with great fear, then that cauterying is another cautery beneath that one. And then cauteries are applied above the horn of the dry head with cauteries until the bone is divided. Cut the bone and discover the quantity of the os that we have recounted and cauteries, and apply it to a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is paused. And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient feels great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I said that this cautery is in its place, because it is clear that the cautery is the one that cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the method of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-ancient migration.
When pain dwells in the head's partition, or it is extended to the vein, then evacuate with mondifying medicines, and administer another cure, which I have dictated in the devotions of illnesses; and all does not apply, then cautery is in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Better cautery with burning medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and scrape it off and bind the extremities of it to both ends of the heads. And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is in the soft place beneath the bone, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen it above the place where it is stopped by constant constriction, and let it be there for three hours; and then remove it and pull out the alum, and let the plague pass for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged coto in a bandage until the place forms a crust.
And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, I will give you some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Better cautery with iron is according to this manner: ignite for cautery of which this is the method.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus formed like a claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is beneath is not injured — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is injured by the vertebrae of the bone thus as the magnitude of it, and elevate your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not injured, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then imbibe the coto in salt water and pause it on the place, and let it be there for three days; and then pause the coto wrapped in a bandage, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see that the cautery is applied to the extremity of the gut according to the cautery, and beware of not making an incision in the artery in this non-ancient migration.
Fourth chapter.
On the cautery of ancient migrations.
When you treat a migration, as we have said about the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery in medicine or the cautery in focus, then it is necessary that you ignore the intestinal cautery until it is whitened, since it indicates above the line of longitude where the greatest pain is, or which one; and hold your hand for a while and strengthen it before incising the artery and penetrating to the bone.
It is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by lack of chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged by that, and that there is no spasmodic convulsion.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is obstructed, because in the obstruction of it there is fear, and greater harm to he who ignores what is done and is not studied and experienced; and thus the operation begins in it at the commencement.
And you will find a reminder of the rule for the flow of blood in the artery according to the usual method, in the same place of this free book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient is tolerable, cautery it in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of straightening of arteries by cautery having two edges, and it is a better cautery this way and more convenient.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with causal remedies and another treatment which was said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form:
And apply the pointed cautery to the ignition, and it should be directed towards the environment of the whole ear as if it were rotating, or in the circle of any of these steps if the pain is in any of them. Gradually apply the cautery to the root of the ear little by little, because you should feel the place in tension.
And if you apply the cautery to several points throughout the entire ear, and thus it is, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Chapter 6.
On the cautery of turbidity.
Turbidity which is treated and with cautery is not only of the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of turbidity with herbs and capyphrenia and gargling, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary that you cautery the illness with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And hold your hand with the cautery for the opposite part of the affected illness, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery in the right extremity of the ear, then rising a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the longitude of the pain, and hold your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specific code is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the gut, the form of which is described in the table. It is more necessary to subtly apply it, because one little bit thus goes far; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive fat a little.
And then cure the place where it is described as a process until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
On the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not succeed and the illness has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said below.
And you have been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more serious; and then you should be cured in a way that proceeds.
Chapter 8.
About the cauterization of oblivion made through a weak flame.
It happens that those given to the patient at the beginning of the illness are large and powerful remedies that significantly influence the servant's mind.
And then you remove the whole head of the patient and place it on the cushion of their employer, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And place those cooled branding irons, because that is the manner of cauterizing. And do it in this way, according to the method which I have already said.
And therefore, if the wounds are healthy; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the back part of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cautery in a way that proceeds.
But if you find the patient is more tolerant, then make the cautery in a middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above both horns (of the head).
Then cure it until it is healthy; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
About the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
It happens that you proceed in mondification of the head with jars and with what we have said; and then remove the patient's head, and then cauterize it with cauteries on the middle place of the head, and with cauteries above all the horns of the head, and with cauteries on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those who are tolerant patients and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and subsequently cauterize until it is combusted from the codeina almost to death, and lift the dead flesh. And then cure it until it is healthy, and this olive oil cautery.
Chapter 10.
About the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that the epilepsy is due to a weak flame.
And therefore it happens that you mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gargles and masticatories to the servant mondifying, beforehand with what is done for many days, in a blessing of the vines.
And then remove the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the preceding manner, and another cautery on its occiput, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil cautery be according to what has been preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then place subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
About the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and weak flame, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that mondifies his brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
And then remove the patient's head, and then make a gentle tortoise-shaped cautery of them above the circle, and then place it in the middle place of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and hold him firmly from all parts.
And then place a liniment; and it is more worthy of being anointed with old olive oil. And warm that over the fire for a tempered heat by measure, which the patient suffers when it is in him. And then apply that to the middle place of his head in the circle, and leave it until it is refreshed.
And do this to the patient for a whole week, another regimen of his good until he is healthy; or if you want, cauterize it making small points according to the manner of him, but holding the hand with one cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humects the brain in equality.
And then stop that constricted area in the belly or in the groin.
Chapter 12.
About the cauterization of descending water in the wheel.
When you have declared the commencement of water in the wheel through the signs which you had said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient who monifies the head of it, and guard against all humidity.
And make that sweating in bath water for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the commencement of water in two wheels, or one side if it is the commencement of water in one wheel.
You should cauterize all the veins and arteries which are in the codeina; and place the cauteries in that long area at the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, apply some medicine to him, which is possible for you.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their excision, and caution against fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries, producing a derivative effect.
Chapter 13.
About the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the wheels are old and assuaged by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head beforehand, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flow of fluid matter, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water in the wheels, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries below two bones. And if you indicate the addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the wheel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
About the cauterization of fetid nasal discharge.
When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to drink to the patient three nights; and rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery mixed with olive oil. And then cauterize that with a clave-shaped cautery on both eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery that you do not cut into that.
And the clave-shaped cautery is in this form.
Chapter 15.
About the cauterization of relaxation of eyelids of the wheels.
When the eyelid of the wheel is relaxed due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
And if you do so, cauterize that above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire partition, and thus lengthen the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
About the cauterization of the eyelid of the wheel when the skin is converted into internal partitions and punctures the wheel.
When the skin of the wheel is converted into internal partitions and punctures the wheel, cauterize in those ways according to two manners, whether it is with iron or with combustible medicine.
If you cauterize him with fire, command the patient to take that water which boils the skin thus as those which are mundane, until they are prolonged and fattened; and if you puncture that which is necessary for its nourishment, then strengthen the wheels of it with a band so that it is not diminished until the skin is born.
When they are born and fattened, then pause the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the wheels of it with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
And then stop that constricted area in a white wheel or in a soft padding on the wheel.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
And then cauterize above the figure which has been signaled, little by little, in gentle touches, until the surface of the codeina is burned, which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, entirely and properly apparent.
And the signal of sanity of the entire work is that you see the eyelid of the wheel already constricted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the wheel.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place a pause on the affected area to reduce the inflammation. And then treat that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if the skin returns to its natural state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized so that the skin does not puncture the vein.
But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift their skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a paper template in the shape of a mitre.
And then take a soothing ointment with living snake oil and an onion. I think there might be some mistake in the original text, as "conogut" doesn't seem to make sense in this context. I'm guessing it might be "cologut", which could mean "colostrum" or "galenget", referring to a type of ointment or unguent. Where it is, and then mix those causes well, and make that a fermentation for so long that it is not frozen; and then spread it on the paper which was made thus in the shape of a mitre, and place that on one vein of both arms; and place below the vein enclosed in an album of skin, and the head of the patient be in the correct position.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in it as if from fire.
And then as you will perceive that the bitterness is passing, then leave the medicine and handle it with your fingers; then as the bitterness ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the vein with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as if washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is; and if it does not turn back to that place where the medicine was not applied and does not deny until the operation is equalized and the vein is constricted.
And then place on the affected area to reduce the coding of the adjustment, and then treat that with a definite ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the vein, and if the eyelid after several days is softened and some cause of the skin punctures the vein, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it to be healed.
And this is the shape of the mitre.
And you know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to what is made your contraction.
And it will not be forgotten the way of rectifying to that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cauterization of fistula that is in the tear duct of the vein.
When you treat a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of the diseases and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary to cauterize that in this manner: command the patient to place their head in the correct position, and hold the head of some minister between the thighs, but in such a way that it is not forgotten nor agitated in the correct head.
And then place the cautery point in an album of skin or in a poultice of ptilli over the vein of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be conical, thus as it is the shape of a reed or a point of a voltor, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as an probe.
But I think that which is cooked is better in the good work.
And then take the fistula if it is open, and draw out its moisture and dry it. And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on the vein the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little away from the cautery of the vein at the bridge of the nose, so that you do not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the vein and corrupt that.
And then at the beginning of the vein cautery, perceive into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on the affected area to reduce and wrap it in a dried ointment until it is healed.
If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is written in the seventh chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula, which the first wise men discovered: then at the place of the fistula and fix it in that fissure as subtly as possible, according to its shape; Then put in it a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you will have your hand in a good retention, and do not let the patient move so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover with a cloth soaked in wine or water, because the melted lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and curing, well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nose according to how it will come back to its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the hernia of the thighs.
Softened moles that make ulcers on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those ulcers with what we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your care, then apply the small cutting cautery according to this form that is described:
And it is the conquest of it (the ulcer) according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then place it (the cautery) carefully in those ulcers until the cautery penetrates to the root of the ulcers.
And then treat it with wax until it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess is formed and then breaks, and it is ruptured, and it is ancient, and correct breaks and it makes a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your care, then stop so that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignition in the hole of the fistula, and you have your hand inside until the iron reaches the root of it, and afterwards make a scab or two; and then treat it with what we have said about curing until it is healthy.
And so if the wound is abscessed and is healthy, well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to how it will come back to its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loosened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then place the head of the patient in the same position, and apply the cautery in the form that will come out thus, likewise that you place the gum over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery firmly, and hold your hand inside until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
And then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop that, because the loosened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is toned up and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not confide in the cure with medicine, then cauterize it according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauterizing with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a copper vessel, and then take it out and wrap it over the extremity of the tongs, and then merge it into the boiling horn, and place it over the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the needle or tube in the cow's horn mentioned above, and place it over the painful tooth, and place over that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
However, the emperor forbids cauterization with fire unless you attend to the quantity of iron or copper, and it is in the heart of some gross thing and the acuteness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then apply the cautery in the form that will come, and place it over the tooth and hold your hand inside until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will be removed or on that day or the next day.
And you should cover the area where that cautery is applied to the patient's good mouth and hold it for an hour, then scrape off the residue; this is the form of the cautery.
You should cauterize where you see extreme excess according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers are caused by flecma and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medications and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this, having two extinguished extremities so that they do not reach the smoke of the cautery to the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if it is necessary for that, until it pervades to the root of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and place it aside for three days and pause on the affected area until it is fully restored, so that what the fire has consumed is repaired.
And then heal that wounded area with tents and dressings until it is healthy.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of wounds of the feet and constrictions of the legs.
When moisture comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is due to coldness of complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medications, and then cauterize that which is the root of the goitre in the affected area.
And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery to the goitre nor burn the cartilage of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery on the joint of the neck in the posterior spine of it. And the cautery of it should be shaped according to the preceding method.
And then heal that which is previously mentioned until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
When coughs and diseases of the lung are caused by cold moisture and the patient does not have fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the forked part in the affected areas of the loins and hips; and with another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and shape the cautery according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, the form of which is previously mentioned in the treatment of pain of the ears.
And let them be points until they reach those; and then heal that which is previously mentioned until it is healthy.
And now the cautery has three ramps because the cauterization is in that: one time you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of the titillations that are on the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not stop in the hour of its return, until it is at its usual custom of returning, and then by a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is ended, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over onto their back or side; and then lift the cartilage which is in the upper part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated above.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the cartilage until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause on the cauteries because they are hot, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a shaped cautery or three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When coldness comes into the stomach and much moisture enters to extract its completeness and it multiplies there, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confuse them, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back with raised hands, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they do not make a mess.
And if the depth of the cautery is equivalent to the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the knee.
And let the shape of the cautery be added in this form, And if you want, make a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the stomach be cautered in points to that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cautery that with a cautery at the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healthy.
Chapter 27.
On the cautery of the ulcerated foot.
When an ulcer on the foot causes pain due to cold or humidity or excessive flatulence until the normal complexion is altered by superfluous egress, and it is cured with the remedy that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the ulcer be elevated above its cervix, and you feel with three cauteries according to this form and this measured quantity on the foot below the hips, where one perceives the decubitus of the man.
And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equivalent to the quantity of the marrow of the vertebrae of the knee, and it does not need further adjustment; and if the ulcer stands above his feet; and if it does not exist, then it will be seated, which has already extended its thighs, and lifted its legs.
And it is possible for you to cautery these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the vertebrae of the entire spine be absorbed so that the entire body is affected and reaches into the intestines, for the spine here is subtle; and you will know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its sheath, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the ulcer will be more grave and painful.
And if it is in the sheath of the foot, the pain is greatly acute and sometimes the doctors are fatigued by the cure of it.
Then it is necessary that the ulcer be turned above its cervix; and then feel the place of the abscess with your hand; and then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a razor, the shape of which has been described on the other page. And cautery it with that cautery until the entire spine is burnt, until it reaches the sapho, until it seems to be healthy.
And then cure it by curing other abscesses until it is healthy.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are recognized; rather, some experiments have been attempted, but I, the Emperor, abandon this, and it is better for us.
Chapter 29.
On the cautery of wounds.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for wounds are made according to this manner of being a doer, and it is this that you take from the roots of Aristology a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge it in oil and expose it to the fire, and then cautery with a cautery at that place where it is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and there is another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another above the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and there is a cautery at that place where it is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifestation of the spine in work.
And thus I have described the ancient methods that are ancient among men who use iron-like cauteries that resemble a razor and ignite it, and place it in that place where it is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and health is restored, just as we have said in the case of the foot ulcer.
In this perforation, cautery is not to be feared, because the humor that has accumulated in the fistula does not bring healing.
Chapter xxx.
On the cauterization of the mole.
When you treat the mole's malady as we have spoken of in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cautery is done in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear incisions according to the length of the mole, following the figure of the cauteries of the finger, the shape of which has preceded.
And it is between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have mentioned in the cauteries of the finger, including the width.
And do not press your hand on the cautery; and the mole's evil is above the two soles.
And there is another way of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauteries having two vertiments, which causes we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and it sets the code which is at the end of the mole where it perceives the evil of the sinister mole.
And it is your elevation where you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the latitude of the body.
And then insert the two vertiments, ignite motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the code of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus you make four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertiments.
And then you cure the cautery, so that it is not necessary to make a break for three days, because it is more comfortable than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter xxixi.
On the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauteries are not made in hydropsy except on the affected limb itself.
When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which we have mentioned in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the finger, and one on the mole, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right foot, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the specificity of the code.
And then leave the cautery open so that it takes a long time to heal.
And do not evacuate the evil of treatment with the cautery, because it is necessary that it be added to the two intentions, and it will be fixed on the healthy aid.
The shape of the cautery is what is cauterized on the belly is club-shaped according to what its shape was previously, and it is what is cauterized on the back is olive-shaped according to what precedes its shape.
Chapter xxxii.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostematized in hydrops and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not touch it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to it at all, because the stagnant water resolves.
The cautery is according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the extremity of the cautery, cutting edge. And the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and another at the middle location of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And then leave the open wound to heal for a long time, so that no stagnant water remains in it.
And then cure the limbs with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the cauterization of the belly and abdomen.
When the belly and abdomen are cold and humid inside, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the evil suffering requires a cautery of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize with a great cautery on the navel according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle, and four cauteries around the subtle navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and a cautery on the alcantin above the large kidney, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities exhibit and the evil is tolerable, then cauterize on the peritoneum and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area, because it is a perfect cure of youth, from which you do not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or humidities that have corrupted, and are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confer quick cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small triangular spine, and with a cautery beneath the umbilical region for two digits.
And if you find that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is often pale, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with a cautery on their arm, and another cautery on their lower back with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and then cure them from the inside so that they may be healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of anthrax, suitable for their abscesses.
When you abscess anthrax, then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. Then insert the ignited cautery into that abscessed anthrax, and hold it there for a short time until you reach the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make a vein or two, because if the abscesses are too strong, then cauterize some of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with what conferes to their healing so that they may be healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more suitable for youthful treatment.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the divided parts of the body.
When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Therefore when you see a fistula in the nature of the body, and it is old, corroding the healthy part of the body and humidities that have corrupted, and therefore it is more worthy to cover it with a subtle tenderness, and then constrict the quantity of the profundity of the body before the aforementioned tenderness.
Then ignite the cauteries that are similar in a row. And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you pierce the tenderness.
And repeat over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And then cure the place until it is healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and you have abscessed from it the materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prison of the corrupted bone, or it falls into those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of wounds.
When in the wounds there is pain from cold or from gross ventilation, and thus the quiet of the patient is disturbed, then cover those wounds with a cautery on each wound with a clavicular cautery, which brings about remembrance.
And strengthen the cauterization on the second small day, so that three linear cauteries will come, and then they will be more suitable for youthful treatment.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debility and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize above the pubic area on the right side of the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of the body.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the nodes of the skin; and cauterize above with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let it be a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix (or uterus).
When cold and humidity come to the matrix (or uterus), and thus it is prohibited from conception, and its menses are corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and there is pain in the having of them, then cover the place that needs to be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical area, as we have said about the bladder; and with a cautery above the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be a clavicular cautery.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
When moisture accumulates and is fixed in the joint of the ankle, and it causes the inflammation of the surrounding area, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is palpated in the boy's hips.
Then you should cauterize the patient on the joint of their ankle with a circular cautery, because you will have sensed it in the circuit of the joint like that which is revolved, and thus the joint will fall into its proper place within the circle.
And this is the cautery of which I previously described the method in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that man with three olive-shaped cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then take care that it is fully healed within.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain goes to the joint of the ankle, and its cause is from cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that is antiquated, then it is necessary to free the patient from gross humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; and then you should cauterize him.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauteries him on the joint of his ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries, according to this form; and do so with good depth. And it is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Sometimes it is necessary to place the cautery on the middle spot on the top of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which the form is precised in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle is contained and burns the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in cases when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend within to the thigh.
Sometimes if it is extended within to the thigh, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width above the affected part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and it is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended within to the spot close to the toes, then cauterize him here where it hurts with a cautery for three points or four or maybe even more if it is indicated for him.
And if the patient feels pain below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him here with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not ultimately use the cautery so much that it burns nerves or great articular surfaces, and that for this reason you are above the patient's evil nuisance or contradiction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterialized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the burnt focus inflated within so that the tumor reached the foot, and the burnt and corrupted entire foot. And then there is a strong accusation of a ventral solution, and then this leads to death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle, cautering with this manner: make a circle of iron like a ring, whose circumference is the width of a palm; and it should be seven or eight inches according to the thickness of a finger's bone or less by a little.
And divide that circle into another third; and it should be the space which is between them, the quantity of the notch of the foot; and these circles are used for two parts; and it should be the length of those keys, one notch or two notches, and make a decently apparelled iron margin in those circles; and this is their form.
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it is red-hot and sparks are emitted, and then it should be placed on the joint of the ankle, the patient collected on the side of the bed. And then cauterize him with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
And then leave him like that for three days; then apply a dressing to him with a bandage and leave the ulcerated plague for many days; and then take care of him until he is fully healed.
Here is the translation:
Maybe the best of the cauters is one who suffers them, and it is necessary to approach the area of his suffering.
Maybe the best cauter is a medicine that adheres, which you make two circles with an armula perforated in the gate of iron; it is the length of the partition in the narrowness of their shoes or those nails.
And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and there are holes above and below, and it is that they contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then stop on the partition of the water where the patient lies on his side, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and then take hot water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the mordication and the adjustment of him — because that stops the mordication thus as with fire — until the mordication ceases.
And then lift your hand from the instrument and remove the hot water from all of the water to lukewarm water.
And then let it be for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and let it be for some days, and correct his poultice; this is the last stage of the treatment.
And then cure him with an ointment until he is healthy.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make him stand in it so that it contains water according to what is done in the water immersion.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkaline and not extinguished from two ingredients, a part one, and grind them and stop in a new vessel of which the part below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the container.
And stop below the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and not extinguished by lukewarm water which holds those for a finger, and since you comprehend them with your own hand for good compression, and let it descend from the sharp water in the part below to the other vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another not extinguished cause and other alkaline renovating, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because that operation makes fire.
And thus of the medicines some are those that are cauterized frequently, thus as they are detoxified and sweetened and made savory in such a way that they are mixed together.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be free of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healthy for a while thus as recommended, because it strengthens his leg in bath and exercise, and he will not have that again.
And it is that he takes certain green cetraragi, and if it is not found green, take fresh fig; and much is ground into a few gray ones and stopped on the water in which there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it is tied.
And let it be for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put him in bath and then when his body is relaxed, put him in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healthy.
And know that it's not necessary to use cautery in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Maybe Escorides says that when the vein of the goat's head is cauterized, it will be beneficial for him; and this is the cautery on him according to this method: take wool and dip it in hot oil, and stop it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
And then take dry goat's head and inflame that in fire until it is made into charcoal; and then stop it on the wool and let it be stretched out. And then iterate that, and do not stop until the sensation of the mordication disappears into the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cautery of goat's horns.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain of Toes.
Some pains in the toes are due to many causes, such as through bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, through infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cauterizing does not cut except in this one species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, evacuate the patient's body with prepared pills and make them similar to theirs, which are made on the back of the hand in the line where the pain is three lines according to its latitude, because you have tentacles in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient's body and its strength.
And it is made a point-cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle point, according to this form:
Chapter 43.
About cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Soft words are whispered to this patient as small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they stumble upon their structure in the wings and elevate their movement.
And vertebrae in the back of the spine of the hand and of its joints that have already started to overgrow above the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that point with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circle.
And if you want, cauterize on the circuit of the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three. And they are the proper points placed between them.
And then heal the area inward so that it is healthy with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
About cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manner of cure and the pains are not left behind, then they remain to be cauterized.
And it is that you cauterize with evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And this is the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains go inward to the teeth or to other joints, and there are many words that are whispered, then cauterize that point with three cauteries or four of the entire part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed for this cautery, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, it is only a little around the specific area of the code.
And if the pains go inward to the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point on the circuit of the veins thus as they revolve, point on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point on the circuit of the veins above each joint and above the finger of the hand.
And if the pains reach the surrounding joints or muscles, then cauterize the corresponding areas of the entire part of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is made with good regimen and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Chapter 45.
About cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestine comes out of its cavity to the genital area, and this is the beginning of an abscess, then it is necessary that you order the patient to stay seven days without eating and to use lenient causes so that the fissure of the seventh ventre is healed.
And then follow the patient between your hands over the seventh back, and command him to hold the seventh wing inward so that it is not visible or appears with the intestine or hernia.
And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew them with thread to hold the rupture over the bone of the pentagonal hand, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the circle of the subordinate parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
so that it is very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then stop the cautery on that sign at your hand, and you will have the consolation of having cured the bone of the toe within the finger of the ring; and it is clear that if you have not achieved this in the first instance, you will achieve it in another attempt.
Observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, lest you burn that intestine so that above the patient's thighs no death or other great evil occurs.
And know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bone, lest it does not confer your operation.
And be careful that the cautery of children is subtle according to their age and the measure of theirs.
And then take care to treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, until the scar is removed from the focus.
And then take care to heal those other ulcers until they are healthy.
And let the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the area and the wound are sealed.
And be careful to pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of his cure, which empties his belly, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is time to get up after 40 days, administer the food decently and gradually, and hold him back for another 40 days.
And let him be moderate in labor and in replenishment of food and drink, and in violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of health, he will be entirely healthy.
And you will direct the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and I want that you do not trust, then cauterize the rupture of that one with a red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and let it be that which is exhorted from the codena, thus as the third part of it; and then take care of that one which we have said, and it will be adjusted.
And you will direct the first ones that the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked on the tents:
And it is a paused line that goes for the latitude in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and pause your hand with a keyed cautery, but the first cautery is more gentle and better.
Chapter 46.
On Cauterization of the Torso.
When pain is felt in some members by chance or by percussion and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then be careful to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be of the entire member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of the torso and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healthy through the first cautery, well; and if not, then apply the cautery again to him; because it is customary for those pains that they are punctured in a member adjacent to another member, so that you know that you have achieved with the cautery until the patient is healthy.
Chapter 47.
On Cauterization of Leprosy.
The leprous wounds are sometimes treated with a cautery for great youthful improvement, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And thus when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is contagious and as that one is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, neither this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of its complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it, and at the forehead to the end of the hairs; and two above the horns; and one behind, above the nape or service.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that you impress a small impression on the bone, and from it the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize above the melsa according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then be careful to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery above the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries above the two mussels, and two cauteries above the two spondils of the neck, and six cauteries above the spondils of the back, and one great one above the spondils near the hip, and one on the hip, and two above the loins, and one above each loin, and two above the ankles, and one above each ankle, and two above the knees, and two above the muscles, and two on the tendons of the seven feet; and cauterize that above all the joints of the said members and feet, and above each talon of the seven feet, and above the foscils of their own members.
And beware of the nerves that are above the ankle, lest they become inflamed.
Some burned areas are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the veins.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more you will benefit and confer; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they have said, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, as is preceded by the species of the instruments.
And then heal the cautery with a mixture of oil and honey, and another remedy enters so that it is healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And it is good to introduce the cautery into the inspection of the codena (knee) a little. And then heal that one with an ointment until it is healthy.
And some burned areas are cauterized for some stupor that reaches the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and gives ease to the nerves which govern that member, and the stupor is removed.
You should not presume more about that, except what is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to the treatment of medicinal ointments, then you cauterize above that with a pointed cautery, a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the knee, until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
And then heal that one with a mixture of oil and lentils, and rose oil, and leaves of dragon plant, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, from each one a part and all are mixed, and then anoint a cloth and place it on the area until it is healthy.
Chapter 50.
On the Cauterization of Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to burn that tumor, then cauterize that with a ring-shaped cautery around its circuit, just as it is revolving.
And I assure you that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; more, I have not seen this, because I think it will be ulcerated, and already I have seen some burned areas.
And it is better to cauterize in the circuit of it with a ring-shaped cautery, just as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On the Cauterization of Indurations.
When some indurations are delayed in maturation, and thus it is because of the superfluity that makes them, or because of the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cauterize in the circuit of it with many small pointed cauteries; and then leave it alone, for it will hasten its maturation.
Moreover, if you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause that in the middle place of the induration until it penetrates the knee.
And if you make a cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that until it is healthy.
Chapter 52.
On the Cauterization of Corrosions.
Corrosion is a corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that one just as a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you want to burn that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries, then ignite clave-shaped cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize that entirely, until you eradicate all the corrosion and none of its causes remain.
And then leave it alone for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a mixture of oil and triple-distilled oil until all scars are entirely eradicated and all corruption.
And then heal that one with flesh-producing ointments.
Moreover, after three days, the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with acute medicine, because that is half in place of cautery. Sometimes a emperor's cautery is applied to the pus to purify the juvenile humor.
And you have already said that the cure of this with medicine is acute in division, and therefore take that which is most efficacious for each of its parts.
Chapter 53.
On the cautery of wounds and other similar things.
Motions are made in the affected parts of the foot afflicted with a wound, which is called a gross, inward, and painful wound; and cautery is applied in two ways, namely burning with fire and burning with hot water.
Sometimes cautery with fire is that which ignites the cautery like a penalty of torture, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that it contains the entire affected part, and should have subtle margins.
And then pause the ignition on the wound, and then turn your hand around the cautery in a circular motion over the wound until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wound. And let it be for three days until it begins to form crust. And then apply a plaster made with marshmallow root and salted water, and let the plaster stay on it for a night, so that it will be eradicated of its roots.
And then heal the place affected by generating flesh until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and motions are made on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is fitting that you administer to them cautery with hot water, and it is that you take a cannula of iron or fire or penalty of torture, and pause it over the wound; and then pour a small quantity of hot water, and remove your hand, and you turn it around in compression of your entire hand, and it should be inserted into the margin of the cannula into the root of the wound, and inject hot water through the tube to the root of the wound; and wait for the patient a little while the biting of the hot water lasts for an hour, and then remove it, because the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do it in those places and then proceed to the other until you have treated all the parts of their body.
And then heal those wounds whose roots are eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate from the engendered juices.
Chapter 54.
On the cautery of trembling.
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to fever from a cold cause, or for another similar cause, then it is fitting that you apply cautery with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between which each vertebra has a cautery; and apply cautery on the soles of the feet, and on the stomach, apply olive oil cautery.
And the trembling of it is restored and strengthened by the health of the affected cold place.
Chapter 55.
On the cautery of sudden accidents to the body.
When the body is suddenly afflicted, and it has pustules that are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore it is fitting to begin with appearances, so that it should be cauterized over every head of the fistula with subtle cauteries of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with roots of long-standing erosion; or with slow-acting cauteries.
And sometimes motions are made to cauterize at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and it is dislodged from the superfluous excess that makes them, and it is healthy.
Sometimes an emperor's cautery is applied to evacuate through phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
On the cautery of fluxes of blood accidentally spilled through incision of an artery.
Many motions are made to fluxes of arteries that are injured by the wound which they have before, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove them.
Then when it happens to that, then you should take it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and pause over that until the tie is tightened and those motions are stopped until the flux of blood from beneath the tie is stanched, and does not flow out.
And then pause at the fire with olive oil cauteries few and large in number, for many motions, and blow over them until they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding above where the tie has been made, and you will hold the cautery until it is bound and restrained, and the blood is stopped.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the tie and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully prepared from the cauteries which are in the fire, and thus do not cease to do it until the blood is restrained.
And beware that you do not confuse the nerves here, and that another evil comes over the patient besides this one.
You know that when the arterial flow is healthy, then it is not possible to restrict the blood in those areas, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four methods: either with a cautery as I have said, or with an extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities of my veins are confused they are restricted and the blood is restored; or that it be tied with a strong ligature, or placed on medicinally constricted areas whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they are strengthened by pulsing in a constriction.
Perhaps he who administers decent restriction of the ligature and structure drops or places causes that burn and resemble, does not comfort but rather tart.
Perhaps if he endeavored to reach an alcove and there is no doctor present or medicine, then make a pause on the aforementioned indication over the orifice of that vein as I have said, and understand the great constriction within which the blood is stagnant due to the dominant part of the plague, and above the artery it does not seem removed; and above the artery is aspurgated with water of great coldness within which the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps you should think about having to cauterize or needing medicine.
Of incision and perforation and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their similarities.
I have said in the first chapter all about the disease in which cautery is convenient and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I will order the chapters according to the subordination of the head into the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be of use to the one who seeks it, then above that which he will have demanded.
And therefore I begin here, certainly, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that which you think is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated catheters are involved, which is with blood in which life is given through the aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exstiration or purification of the plague or extraction of sageta or incision of peyra and their similarities. And all those accompany fear and trembling, and in the end of their catheters death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the seat, because some evacuated cases are of those who have manners of men with many manners of diseases. And of them it is certain that they are carried away by their disease and it is far from them to death, and thus for the vehemence of what he finds in his disease, and for the length of his disease, and in the disease it is fear which means death.
And of those it is what gives to your son to have and to say, you hoping for that health, and the following disease is pernicious.
And therefore you do not think that you consent to that which comes to you from this manner; and your caution should be greater than what is said, and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause over what is not certain science which verifies what comes to you, and in which you perceive laudable success.
And you will be established in the cure of all your diseases with prognosis and indication of that which is converted health, because in that it is to you helpers above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspire you with good understanding and may not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this distinct chapter according to the chapters that precede in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be of use to you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
You know that this disease many evacuated places reaches the infants from infancy and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant its livelihood.
And some evacuated places reach through a hidden cause which is not known.
Perhaps you have not seen this disease except in infants; and all those whom you see are caught by death, and thus it is to me a hidden work in those.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of him was always thus magnified until it ceased not being able to be measured by the greatness of his head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until he died from suffocation.
And this humidity or moisture is added between the vertebrae and the bone, or it is added beneath the bone over the ribcage.
Because the operation is such that the moisture is between the vertebrae and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a hole in the middle of the head in a latitude, and let the length of the hole be two inches so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
And then if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two holes here, according to this manner.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, it seems that you have opened the entire skull and the water is pouring out when you compress it with your hand in that place, and it is not possible to hold it back in the partitioned areas. It is necessary to make three holes in the middle of the head, according to this manner.
and then the incision is made to extract all the moisture; and then the holes are strengthened with bandages and plugs; and then apply oil on top for six days, and then remove the ligament and cure the wound with tents and unguents, and strengthen the head in equality; and nourish the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healthy.
And there is another manner of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated places are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the flow of water is finished, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those flowing veins of blood and harm the patient by that flow of blood in evacuation of moisture.
Chapter third.
When there are formed some catarrh or rheum in the veins or at the feet, and it is antiquated, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And then it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's reason loses his head, and then make a hole in the place with a sharp instrument so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a bandage; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of whoever is above the places which are near the aurelles, and they hide themselves until some homes.
And then make a sign on the artery with a tent, and then incise whoever is in the spatula of whoever is in the partition above in the pervening incision into the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula beneath the artery and turn it to direct the incision to the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with a pulsating egress, which is felt before it becomes frequent.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary to measure from the aurelle the quantity of space of three digits, and then make a sign with a tent, and finish into the bone.
And that which is necessary to stop the flow of blood is a quantity of six ounces. and for it is not possible to stop the flow of blood more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and from the refill of the artery of it.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone some cause of the ribcage, then incise that so that no abscess is cauterized.
And then strengthen the wound with bandages and ligaments of cloth, and then cure it with unguents until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there are some old accidents or chronic catarrh, due to humid and agronomic qualities in the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not concur, then we have spoken about these maladies, extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's reason loses the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden until few homes due to vehemence of friction.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some bandage; and then make a hole in the place with a sharp instrument or evacuate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula of which this is the shape: And then you scrape the codename in that which is facilitated into the artery; and then get into the intestine and extract that from the upper parts into which you extract that from the codename and discover that of the tunics which are left there, from the whole part.
Perhaps the artery is subtle, then envelop that in the extremity of the ounce, and then incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and constricted, and there will not be a flow of blood, because if they are not incised they will not push out the blood at all.
And then evacuate the blood from twenty veins. into three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate that in two places with a double strong band or cord at length, and do not touch the putrid decay within the consolidation of the plague and obstruct the flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do that at that hour or then another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cutellar cautery so that the extremities of it are incised, and stand in place of that same work.
And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complex complexion; for cautery is of those causes that help the final humidity, and thus it is better in judgment.
And it is necessary to extract the arteries that fill the place of ancient custom, and they are placed decently on the pulses, and then are cured with secret medicines that make the flesh new and heal the wounds so that it is healthy.
And if meanwhile you work on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the artery, then you touch to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of custom, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place so that the blood is congealed, and moisten the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and it is strengthened according to what is necessary.
And that which is more suitable in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cuttles, because you have touched the two places with tension, and paused sometimes, not igniting, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the sharpness of the two cuttles together. Perhaps emperor if it is sharper with two cuttles it is better, because if they are agitated together with two cuttles properly on each friction, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
Then with those it is some greatness, it holds the heat of fire in those and the flesh is separated more lightly.
And this work is better in all work and more lightly.
And it is the space which is between two cuttles the quantity of the greatness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of body of sharp and acidic humors of the wells.
When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not find in that any cause of the cure by medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in the dry front of walking thus as if they were walking with formicas, and the wells of that are extinguished, humidifying thus that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient groans mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and no one mentions that cure in space.
And it is that you command the patient to raise the skin which is on the dry front, and then incise in the front three fissures equally distant according to the length of the front. And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge apparelled or secret threads much with which they extract the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: It is part of the temple that enters into the second incision. Extract the whole codeine that is between two incisions on the spine, which is above the bone, and then make a small incision entering into the second incision. And then insert a spatula into this space and enter the first incision with another instrument called a cutter, one part of which has a hook and the other part does not have a hook.
And stop the bleeding of that hook which is near the annexed flesh of the codeine, and the bleeding of the lion's tooth within the bone, and fill in so that it reaches the smaller fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the wheels.
It is better to continue the incision up to the codeine, and then make a small cut in the smaller fissure into another fissure.
And then correct the flow of a certain quantity of blood, express the places of the congested blood's passages.
And then stop in each fissure a warm compress of cotton wool, and place it above those swollen veins that are inflamed with pus and oil, and take care not to cause an abscess with caution.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or tepid water, and then cure it with a gentle anointing of basilicon ointment and other remedies so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending from the top parts of the head.
When there comes a catarrhal flow and it continues, and sometimes the patient's eyes are slightly extended, and already their gaze is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of this the skin is rough, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent tension, then we know through this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come from many veins of the top parts, but rather proceed from.
And the best cure for these is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that place at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the width (and start from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple; and make an incision into the bone; and extend your hand between the fingers of the temples which are numb from mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with cotton wool or absorbent cloths. And then strengthen below with swollen veins in pus and oil, so that they do not cause an abscess with caution.
And when you remove that and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and then cure it with a regiment of dry poultices which make the flesh new, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make an emplaster and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the cure of that which falls into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and copper, or it is from a plant thus as cypress or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus as water and vinegar and its similarity, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if sometimes the peyra, then distill it into some cause of violet oil or sizzami, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sternutation with conditi, and open the nostrils for the advent of sternutation. And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts below, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gesti, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And then if it is not forgotten through that, then make a tube of iron and insert the extremity of the tube into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the tube with wax and oil mollified so that nothing passes except the tube. And then extract it from the tender vein with strong attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with that which we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of alum bat or of prepared vessel with which the vessels are pressed together in a certain quantity, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently stopped with cotton. And then you will insert that into the channel of the ear to facilitate it, and then remove the ear's moisture.
So then if you have not forgotten all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch that tooth with a pointed cauter or spasms.
And the manner of touching that is that you at the beginning sensibly open the patient's vein and extract the blood according to the manner of their vertigo, and then make a circle between your fingers and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the radix of the ear from which the grey matter flows into the place previously prepared. And it is the lunar-shaped fissure that leads to the rock, and, the rock being opened, you will find if you can apply an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
And if the cause resides in the ear and is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take subtle spatula tuned according to this form. and administer to that the abscession of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And do not think that it is humidified by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and try to extract them with the nails or with a subtle gesture, or as if by inscizio, as I have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, it is necessary to use sternutation at the beginning, and fill the entire ear with a great deal of warm liquid, and pour over that ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three small stones and lions according to the length of the finger, and heat them in a little fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the channel of their ear and sounds above on one side of that part and percusses with another stone over the stone which touches the ear. So do not cease until all the water is forgotten.
So do not cease until all the water is forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten, and you will take paper or cotton wads. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned, the wax of it.
And then place another cotton wad and make as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and pull out that with a cannula, just as it is said of the extraordinary stone.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its likeness, cure it thus as we have said in the division; but if it is a great thing which causes pain at the time of evacuation, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and nails, and the cause of it is put lighter than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun.
And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle nails, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and wide, of which this is the form. And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck with force, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your own judgment, then stop and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer the distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And it is your effusion which you infuse with medicinal oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the form. And make that of silver or of copper, straight, in which there is a small channel, and with a plate on top.
And so it is how they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, to be necessary here onwards. And if you want, take the rod and envelop it decently in the extremity of the cannula, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with warmth above and express your hand, which has compression tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And it is necessary that what has infiltrated in the auricle be scraped off at the focus with a small flame. And beware that the cause which you have distilled in the auricle is not too frequent, for ear medicines do not suffer what is there.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of obstructions of the ears.
Some blocked passages in the ears of those who are not pierced, and it happens to some people, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growing there; and this obstruction is made in the precipice of the ear canal which does not allow the evacuation, and some blocked passages are in the fore-part.
And that which happens in its precipice, which does not allow evacuation, is among the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that one where you achieve evacuation, it is necessary that you apply the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it carefully. And so if an apparent obstruction occurs, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form.
If the extremity of it is where the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula should be of two gentle lions so that it does not cause lesion to the ear.
And so if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in its middle, then you should cut subtly and incise vigorously to facilitate entry so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the precipice of the ear, then take a subtle lion's root and scrape that with a small flame, and place it in the middle of the ear.
And so if you feel an obstruction there, which the patient feels bothered by, due to the gravity of the humor, it forces the oppression there; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place a dressing on the ear, wrapped with linen according to the quantity of the width of the canal which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a saucepan and pulverize over the ground tristan and use it; and if the ear is already apostemed, then it is necessary that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in wax that has been roasted, until it is the aposteme carefully heated; and then cure it until it is healed.
Moreover if there occurs a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another remedy that restrains the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of atrophies which occur in the eyelids.
Atrophies that occur in the eyelids of those who have some blocked passages, some blocked passages are dry.
Then it is necessary that you hold those in a warm place or in a bath, and soak them in their own roots, and then place a dressing on the affected areas, well ground.
Moreover if there is pain with a flow of blood coming, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
And the best cauterization is when the incisions and blocked passages return when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Some blocked passages occur in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled with cataract in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called cataract.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the upper and lower eyelids.
Then the operation in them is that you should consider then if the cataract is proceeding in it from what appears on the eyelid and is manifest to the entire part; and the cause of it is sluggishness.
Then make an incision above it with a width, and then scrape off the entire affected part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it in a warm bath and separate it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that because the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the inner surface, then you remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract in a warm bath, otherwise you indicate an incision, and prepare that for the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, that will not be noticed in any case.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of the area where it becomes enclosed so that it heals.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid from the wound.
Abscesses are greyish in color which are generated in the membranes of the eyelid, and they greatly affect children, aggravate the wounds of those who have them, and cause their eyes to itch; and they cannot gaze at the clarity of the sun because of the bitterness that is caused by them.
And so you should often wash their faces all the time, and their faces sleep; and so under their eyelids you will find humid membranes, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent ulcers in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel apparent ulcers.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his evil humor in the finger, and then pauses a drop of liquid from it and of the warm water, and makes a circle according to the quantity that contains arthritic matter from the whole affected part, and then places it on that and presses with fingers all around so that ulcers are aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then feels in the middle of that humidity incident in the fissure through the latitude, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
You should rather cover the whole wound with a bandage so that you prevent ulcers from forming, because in the aforementioned processes ulcers form through fissures according to the shape of white greyish matter.
Then extract that matter with drops which you have enveloped between the fingers and parts of the fore and turn between the right and left hand so that it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not touch the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the wound and touches only that.
But if your ulcers do not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but rather you touch the fissure with a small facilitated instrument so that it processes the ulcers; and then extract that matter as we have said; and then mix drops of liquid in water and wine and place them on the area and strengthen those powders.
And thus you will find that they draw out salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
And then heal it until it is healthy.
But if there are aposteme boils on the spot, then treat them with cold emplasters until they are healthy.
Chapter 11.
On methods of touching wounds.
When in the eyelids of wounds there are natural pustules and so antiquated, then those wounds do not heal and become ways of evil humors thus with assiduous tears and mollification of eyelids and skin until it is cause of destruction of the wound that is called touching of the wound, and it is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched through incision and suture; or with canes as you have already said.
And then cover the head of the evil humor in your finger; then convert the eyelid of the wound with your left hand, and if it is converted, good is; and if not, insert a needle in that part where there are pustules under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate under the pustule, and it will be — near the edge of the eyelid where the pustules are — near the pustules, and pull the thread to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
And then feel in the affected part of the eyelid under the pustules with a spatula incident to the large lacrimal duct up to the smaller one; and then extract the thread and place it under the eyelid with small powders of cotton or drops, and then sew above the eyelid with a tent, and it will be thus like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in humans, because of those it is indicated that a large quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then feel with the spatula on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the large lacrimal duct up to the smaller one. And if your fissure is near the natural pustules thus like the largest tumor of the king.
And then place the onion on one of the two angles of the wound, and then excoriate that entire area, and then adjust with a scalpel the two labial lips with a subtle thread or wool, and remove the blood, and make it adhere so that what is superfluous of the threads above the eyelids in some envisioning causes, if you want to do that, and if not, do not cure.
And you should leave the stitches on the fields for three or four days, and then take care of it.
If you want, leave the wound with its stitches, and take care of it so that it dries and contracts, because the eyelid is lifted from the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but the stitch is better. Therefore, you should not touch the taxes of the surrounding skin.
You will find that it is solicitous above the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
And it is another manner of examining, and it is that you sense above the eyelid figure thus as a mirror of the eye, and then lift the eyelid by three inches separate and congregate according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do so, hold the inches, and it is not bent, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other end near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other end near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between the tendons of the two eyes equally, and then elevate your hand in elevation, elevate the entire code above which you sense thus as having recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitches, and take care that it is healthy inside.
But if you find an abscess from your incision or your fissure, then that abscess is with wax and it resembles it, and it is enswaddled.
And some vegetables are applied to the eyelid that the wise men convert, then you should use in that of it which we have said about incision; but the stitch is sometimes more artificial.
To examine with a candle as follows: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then by artful skill do two candles or two subtle astrolabes of which the longitude will be according to the longitude of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs will be smaller than the latitude of the spatium. And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add certain subtleties under that which superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the candles of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and leave it for some days, because the code for the morbid structure will be denied and it will be poured in until you measure yourself falling.
But if it is delayed, then cut the skin with the scissors, and then take care of the wound until it is healthy.
Since it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the wise men do not puncture.
And this is the method of two candles which you will make according to this form: and it has the quantity of longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of piercing wise men in the wheel with a needle when the wise man is hard.
When they are unnatural wise men, hard and asperous and piercing the wheels, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and pause on that delicate thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and make some subtle movement in a subtle manner. And it is the longitude of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
And then you combine another subtle thread below it in brief, and knot the extremities of that if you want.
And then pause the patient's head in the tendon, and it is proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted wise man which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract it beneath the natural wise man.
And then pull the wise man from beneath and introduce it into alignment, and be the wise men one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand so that the wise man is dislocated from alignment in the eyelid with the natural wise man.
But if it is dislocated from alignment and the wise man is not guided, you will dislocate alignment at the divided parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is guided to alignment of the upper trajectory.
And you will see that in the vision of the wheel, because then you will guide alignment and the thread, and you will bind some and close the wheel, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the wise man adheres to his place and is born above good flesh.
And if it is more brief the wise man, then you adjust a long wise man of the natural wise men, and it is elevated in that, or that it remains until it is aligned properly with some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter 13.
On the care of evacuating the humor which is seen in the eyelid beneath.
When the vein in the eyelid is constricted, and it is opposed to the eyebrow when it is contracted on either side, right or left, for bad consolidation of plague or of section or of cautery, and it is called leprosy, and this constriction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of plague or of sections or of cautery, or for semblance to their evil habit.
Maybe the manner of the operation is that you perform that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it what is between them a kind of drawing of liquid, and bind them together so they are healthy.
And do not cover that you use for the cure of it from the causes which are exhausted, constricting; because if you do so returns to the bad state worse than never having had health.
Use in that of causes which soften thus with fenugrec, and imbue water in which are cooked altea and essence of it, or inject dyaquilon, which is liquefied at the alcove of the joints, and submerge in that measure, and cure in that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce totally into a whole that is not consolidated according to the form that you began with.
And this operation which we have described, is not but some rectification of bad alignment that does not return the form of the place according to what was beforehand.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of bad alignment which is done on the eyelid below.
This bad alignment which is done on the eyelid below, which is naturally called bad alignment; and it is either a natural one or an accidental one.
Bad alignment caused accidentally by plague or by section or by cautery or by other similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double filament, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the filament penetrates into the two extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spatium of ample size. And then if it returns to the shape of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the figured end, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and they are of their made angle until when they gather together they form the figure of theirs.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then lift the flesh for the quantity that is the width of the lower eyelid below it, so that you see the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and then cure it with what we have said about the softening medications and poultices until it is healthy.
And if bad alignment occurs through fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of bad alignment when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of bad alignment, and that is in various forms of diverse motivations.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in whatever manner is possible to return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and that evil according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many homes in such a way that the eyelid is solidified above the album of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facilitation of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it in its own, or stretch it to the nail.
And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatium, which is not at the point of the incisions, having obtained an obtuse little hole so that the evil is not disturbed by the operation, and remaining with the spatium that does not lead to the eye in its acuity.
And it is your incision that excavates that adhesion to facilitate until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salty water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and place on the eye a woolen cloth infused with album of egg, and then use three days of causes consolidating until it is healthy.
Chapter 16.
About the inflammation of a nail and the prominence of flesh around the eyelids.
You know that a nail is affected in two ways, either it is nervous, and resembles a subtle dryness; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white congested humidity, which when touched, or it is forced to take hold of it, is abscessed and the onychia is not fixed in it.
And both species do not come out except from the larger tear gland, which goes in little by little to cover the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the wheel.
The way to operate in the inflammation of the nail is that the patient holds their head in the same position, and you operate on the wheels of it, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail on the edge of a little duplicate extension and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert it into a horsehair or a bowstring or a vaqua, or similar things, or a strong file, or duplicate the extremity of the little needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it to the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and extract it from the skin at the side of the nail, which closes the pupil. And thus you will follow it into the skin until you reach the back of it.
And then you will inject the remedy into the root of the eyelid with a subtle spatulum or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by injecting it, you do not induce continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has a file, thus we have said, and then it must be excavated with a lion-shaped spatulum, from which this is the form of it.
And be careful that with the spatulum you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not induce a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then apply the inflammation to the wheel with a little of triturated salt or of sieved ceruse, and let it be until another day; and then cure it with what covers it so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, nor is it fixed in the onychia, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I have written and recommended in the division.
And if you want to operate on it, then you open the wheel of the patient and take a subtle lion-shaped spatulum with a very sharp point, according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and congealed and takes hold in the root, then distill from your work in the wheel of sieved ceruse or of rough ceruse or of triturated salt, and apply the wheel until another day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is of it is removed, but not so that a contrary abscess remains in the wheel, because then you leave it, and cure from the beginning the abscess until it is healthy.
And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healthy.
The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if you notice it in the wheel for great benefit, suspend it on the onychia; and inject it from that one part, and do not finish the injection so that you do not induce flows of tears.
And then distill in the eyelid rough ceruse and sieved ceruse until it is healthy.
Chapter 17.
About the inflammation of a certain abscess and of what is born from adjusted flesh in the wheel.
Some growths in the wheels of some eyes are born from rough flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to compress the eyelids at the front and it is assembled like a rose of balcony.
The operation in it is that the patient holds their head in the same position; and then you operate on the wheels of it and collect all that flesh on the convenient onychia, and take hold of it with a forceps or a chest; and then inject the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wheel that you do not deviate from your operation.
And it is your injection in which you inject those or with the spatulum that we have recommended in the injection of the nail, or with small forceps that collect the ascites according to what will be the form of it, as we will see in this chapter.
When your injection is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wheel with triturated salt, or distill in it rough powder and similar to the corrosive medicines, and apply it over the wheel beforehand like a coat of albumen until it is assured against abscess.
And if you find some cause of gout in the heel and it is anointed with holy oil, and they have apostema wounds, then lift up the heel and cure that apostema wound in such a way that it ceases to be an affliction, and afterwards apply heat upon the affected area until it is healthy, and similarly make adjustments to the flesh so that it adheres to the heel of this special case.
Perhaps you will find that total cure of the heel fracture occurs naturally or accidentally, it works with iron, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently strong to undergo that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of pus in the heel.
Pus that comes out rough and thick, which is tested on the heel and prevents the healing of its operation, and it develops the heel over a long period of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the heel on which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment except pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their healthy cap in the tieu seat, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle double-layered form according to this method:
or two ounces gradually in a vase according to this form:
And then you collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and you extract the holy hour at that hour, until you see those veins being freed from the heel and are revolved.
And beware that you do not lead the heel to the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill on the heel clear water or red wine so that you may acquit the corroding quality that is removed from the pus.
Perhaps it is not possible for you to collect everything at that hour, and then you apply a plaster to everything that ceases the pain of it, and lift it up for some days until the pain of it is calmed and it is assured of holy apostema.
And then apply heat upon it according to the method that the doctor will manipulate until it is healthy.
And this is the form of the fractures:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of aristati to the nose.
When you treat aristati with a cautery or with acute burning medicine according to what is previously described about it and it is not healthy, then it is not engendered in it except that you make an effort over the apostema until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and it appears in it corruption or blackness, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named an aspere cap, and it is made of iron indeed, and the cap is rounded thus as to make it pointed for pointing with lime or alkali for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
And stop that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then you rotate it between the fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
And then it will be made with some evacuations, and then you restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and it has absorbed the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematized and it does not accide in the accident, then you know that it is healthy.
And if not, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover from second bone or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take a tribe according to this form:
It is the extraction of the iron triangle, and the staff of it is first extended until at the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then stop that on the bone, and it is that prop of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the heel, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels it for so long as it arrives to heal, and that sends vent to sir per so that you know when it is healed.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent medicines, drying thus as I have described.
Therefore when the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the divided parts before returns to the nose, therefore it is easier to treat the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel eminates in its entirety and does not accide in the nuisance or diminution, then you believe that it alleviates the patient, and then you follow, and then you stop ventoses on the cervical scarifications and suck for good suckling; and then you stop on the heel with liniment made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then you strengthen the emplaustre over the heel with many poultices.
And the manner of taking poultices is to take four wraps of linen cloths, and each wrap should be doubled in four places; and make them from those cloths.
Then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that each has needed for its cure. Then stretch over them a strong wrapping with a firm structure; and afterwards apply cups to suck out the bad humors; and then remove the cups and let the bad humor be evacuated day and night.
Perhaps the ligament is softened, then it should be covered so that it does not become too relaxed.
Then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
And if the bad humor has been reduced, well and good, then afterwards apply the plaster to the poultices and the structure and the cups until it is healthy.
Chapter 21.
About the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
When there is disruption in the tunicate vein, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outward beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is altered for that reason, and you want to operate on it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the vein at the upper part below, and then put another needle in the double layer of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle follow its direction; and then inject into the area of the double layer and lift it away from the part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and stretch it strongly.
Then extract the needle and place it on the bad humor that has been infused into the white of an egg, and let it be until the thread is absorbed into the vein.
And then heal the bad humor in that which comforts it until the wound is healthy.
And some vegetables are added to the entire area in a circle of cloths until the bad humor is greatly adjusted, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the head of the bad humor, and correct the albugineous humidity, and descend the bad humor and enter as soon as possible.
And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
About the cure of ulcers.
This bad humor that is called an ulcer is not but a sane humor that is adjusted in the similar bad humor, like descending water and it is not that.
Perhaps the manner of operating on it is to make the bad humor rise over the prepared and straight surface, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mauve until you see the sane humor pervading the lower parts, and then it should be dried and not descend, and the light should be stopped, and the bad humor sees the causes thus far.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Perhaps if it is not prepared to descend to the sane humor as we have said, then make the bad humor rise between your hands and take a subtle spatula and spin it over the panniculus circle surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal circle (within the place you see), until the sane humor is forgotten.
Then since it is forgotten, then you distill the bad humor into the water that flows in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be cured by the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 22. (Note: It seems that there are no more lines to translate, so this might be the end of the text.)
About the cure of the descending water from the bad humor.
We have said the species of the water in the division and what is convenient to perform with the declaring sermon, then that according to the sanity.
Then it is necessary that you make the bad humor rise between your hands over a hot brick and bind the dry bad humor there, with a very strong motion.
And then place near the eyelid of the dry bad humor your left hand, if the bad humor is on the left; or with your right hand, if the bad humor is on the right.
And then with your right hand take the emetic, if the bad humor is on the left; or with your left hand, if the bad humor is on the right.
And then place the extremity of the emetic near the circle for the greatness of the vein in the white of the bad humor from the part of the lacrimal gland, and then inject the emetic into the vertebrae and rotate your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the bad humor and feel that the emetic has already been conveyed to the cause, which is seen.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the emetic be at the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the circle of the bad humor; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the bad humor through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then stop the magic in the place where the water is, and you put the tar in a vessel below, and thus if the water descends quickly, then the patient will soon recover their sight, and the magic will be in the sieve above.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you put away that other vessel before the magic is touched.
And then when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the magic with ease, and turn around that little hand of yours a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small crystal clear gemstone salt, and in that lava the whole dentition; and stop the flow of the oil infused with rose and album of wood and ligature around that whole thing.
We, however, who are of our time, place above that as a compress wrapped in album of wood.
And if you do not obey the magic at the entrance of the hole for its hardness — because it is the alcove of the men whose hole is very hard —, then take the spatula which is called the aluminum tool, of which this is the form.
And then pierce at that conjunction, and do not ultimately put your hand in the tract, and it is not so that you make a way to the magic place subtly.
And then introduce the magic according to what we have said.
And receive the complement of your work, prepare the patient's dormitory decently made in which they sleep above the sieve with two mattresses in dark obscurity, and be prohibited from all movements.
And stop in the nature of that water so that its nature is cleansed, and do not move the sieve head to the right or left side at all.
And be the binding according to its disposition within three days.
And then dislodge that in that dark mess and expel the clear sight, and do see some causes, and then return the binding within seven days.
And do not take that as doing it at the hour of the cures or then stop the infusion. You will find that you estrange that water so that it will not flow strongly and vehemently with great regard.
We however accelerate the postema carefully, then you take out the hole within seven days, and rectify that which remains of the water that gives postema.
Then you absolve the sight of it and stop on the face of its orifice for which the vegetation of the days is ruled, it exists in the dark mess.
And then be freed from that dark mass gradually and converse with its causes.
And know that in the slate it is not excused to omit some vessels, and then you will be hard about the operation.
And now we have arrived at some of those which are in the Artach, and it is said that they make fire in the Ayrc magic perforated with which the water is succeeded.
We however found not in our land the one who has perfected that water, nor is it legitimate in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic for which they are above those ones which ignore them.
And they are made of iron or of proprietary iron, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the healing of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh wounds adjusted from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many pains, or to a polyp of feet; and this bad condition is called polyp because it is similar to that foot represented. And of them is flesh cancerous, scabby, of dark color; and of them it is that the flesh is not of dark color.
Then in that which is in these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous flesh, take the patient to sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and open their nostrils, and prick the tender spot once in those flesh. And then extract that to the divided parts beforehand, and then insert it so that you have comprehended of those I will spatulate with a subtle instrument within one part until you know that all the flesh is restored; because if it remains of none of the causes from which the abscess is possible, then you will remove it with one of the subtle instruments facilitated within, so that none of the causes remain. We however master the saint or accelerate postema carefully, then you stop at that water which takes; or it is of the malignant postemas, then you cut and cauterize that within so that it be absolved saint and all the cavities are restored.
And then be gotten in the nose, then stop the insertion of the vein agreeably with water or wine. More often if the nose is opened and its processes are humidified inward into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that nothing is being done in the purulent matter of the nose's ossified passages which have not received absorption.
Then it is necessary that you feel the pulse of the patient to see if there is some thickness, and examine the nostrils, and pause between each breath to measure the quantity of the digit or month, and diagnose the patient and insert an extremity of the pulse into the nostrils at the edge of the radius or at another cause which is possible.
And then you will have made, that you attract the sieve's ornament into the canals of the nose, and it is situated over the sieve's gully, because many vain attempts seem to make sense in this action, as if children are playing at school, and it is a useless cause for one who does not want to do.
And then pause the two extremities of the pulse, one extremity that is placed over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle serration of flesh on the nostrils which are in the pulse, and do so inwardly until you know that the flesh is already in the nostrils of the pulse.
And then extract the pulse, and pause in the nose to extract an abstraction of blood a little water, and do so for three days or more until you know that the entire corrupted thing is removed from the carnal.
And then at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
But if you have reached a crisis point in the cure that is exhausting, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge" which makes the distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils.
And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lamp opened, thus with a small container, and the middle similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube thus as a cane, and the canal of the instrument called "capipurge" is flat, uncovered; which is handled in the back of it, with which you hold that when you extract oils or whatever you want from the juices and causes succulent.
Chapter 25.
The veins that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Many vain attempts are born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned for several days until when a word is legible from the regard of it.
And for that reason you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that. And then pause over the place or apply a burning medicine which was in its place.
But if the infection is delayed until it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sensation, then do not touch that iron quart because it is a cancerous aposteme; because many vain attempts are made to infect this aposteme everywhere for great malice over that which it had.
And if the aposteme is of a gentle touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the infection is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and infect them without fear, and cure the place with what is extracted and constrained until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
About the suture of the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by resemblance.
You know that when you make a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few conferees are made in that operation except in some houses.
Then it is necessary, when you reach some cause of those, to consider if it is fresh plague with the healthy sieve, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made sane, then it is necessary that you extract some part of its apparent coding until it is not healthy. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on those sprinkle healthy dragon's blood and essence of threefold, and pause over the powder a piece of emplastering diafinicon, or of some other of the consolidating emplasters, and leave that liat for two days or three, and then dislodge that and permute that emplaster and leave that until the veins are absorbed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
The greatest mastery of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with ague threads thus as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with faithful threads thus as you and make yourself knowledgeable.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come into the two lips in the divided parts of the teeth.
Softened masses go to make homes in the divided parts of their lips, near the apostemic ulcers that resemble fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Then you should convert the lips and separate each of those hardenings from the entire part, and apply the abscess umpliscas to the place of the threefold drawing in, so that the blood may be restored, and apply it with a gentle agreement and heal the place where it is stipulated, so that it may be sanated.
Chapter 28.
About the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
A great deal of softened matter forms over the adjusted flesh in the gums, which the ancients called albumen, then it is necessary that you suspend that matter with an onion or that you hold it with forceps and incise it to its root, and let the healthy blood flow or the sound blood.
And then stop on the place of threefold drawing in, or other stippled or excitant powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the reason for teeth being iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts of the mouth and of those in front and between the adjusted gums, there are scorched, rough, and blackened masses, and some are citrine or greenish, so that the gum is corrupted through that decay and the teeth become loose.
And then it is necessary that you make a separator between your hands and pause the head of it in the tieu seat, and extract the teeth in which those scorched masses and causes appear resembling sand, so that from them no root cause remains, and that makes the blackness and citrinity and other things that are mondified.
Then if that is the state of affairs at the beginning of the reason, well; and if not, then you iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore because the roots are those that the tooth is rooted in the divided part of the mouth are other than the roots that are rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots have been prepared by you, which you will see soon:
Chapter 30.
About the eradication of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain entirely and quickly in total eradication of it, because there is no cause that supplies the matter of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance that excuses itself in the eradication of it.
However, you should be certain when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must be certified which is the painful tooth, because many matters of pain deceive the patient and think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, because we have not seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how do you certify which is the painful tooth, and what do you know, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then mau with those tieu digits, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
And then put something in the strong tooth-holds for good loquacity or strong estuption, and pause the head of the patient between the denolh tieus that you hold so it does not move, and then extract the tooth according to rectitude in a mastery that you do not tremble, nor does the patient feel major pain.
And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it thus as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen it with a subtle extremity of ray so that it is not trapped in the hour of your construction over that hold.
And it is necessary that you operate with precision in the scarification of the entire part of the gum and guard much your strength so that you do not tremble and remain parted from it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
Be careful that you do not make the same mistakes as ignorant barbarian surgeons in their foolishness and audacity regarding the eradication of these, lest they administer what we have recommended; for many misguided treatments come to afflict the gravely ill patients whose cases are more difficult than those that have been treated, and the roots of their illnesses remain altogether, or some of them, or that you extract those bones from the mandible, just as many misguided treatments have testified.
And then eradicate it by washing the mouth with hot or cold salt water solution.
And if you induce fluxes of blood for that purpose, just as many misguided treatments induce, then apply a certain quantity of poultices and aspergus upon the wound, and if that poultice does not confer, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps should be subtle as those that are made to extract a tooth from the beginning, with a long handle and thick, so that they do not bend when one has to operate with them.
And they are also like times of thick handles that enter so that when one holds them in those, they do not bend, but are brief and extruded.
And they are made of Indian iron, expertly made with extruded instruments, and in the extruded parts of those, there are teeth that enter one into another and hold strongly by constricted force, and some misguided treatments make the extruded parts in the shape of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter 21.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from injured jawbones.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is injured by some cause, then it is necessary to apply pressure over the affected area with a bandage for a day or two until the area is softened; and then insert gently or hold the extruded instruments which are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guarantee, the shape of the forceps.
The extruded instruments of theirs are made of dentine, just like lime or alumbage.
And if they do not obey you at this time with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary to cave in on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name "atáli", it is a small lever whose shape is this.
And let it be of brief extruded thickness, small, and not bent so that it does not get injured.
Therefore if the root is forgotten, well; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument is triangularly extruded in which there is some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a more subtle extruded part.
And thus you will be helped by this instrument having two slants of which this is the shape, suitable for the following: and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because juvenation is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large hook, and this is the shape:
of the triangularly extruded part, twisted or short, which has some thickness, and not bent so that it does not get injured.
And another thing, the instruments of the teeth are moved similarly to the other instruments.
The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in the art, attentive to their mate's needs according to what they mean by operation and various illnesses; because they are of the illnesses for which the ancients did not describe nor pause to use proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is injured, or if it is fractured, then cure it in its place with what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have said are used in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with the gestures of which this is the shape:
And let it be with some small thickness little by little, and let it be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is entirely forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines conveniently adapted to that.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away that fracture and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in that shape, and especially when they are induced in women, and especially in venerable old people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not attached to another tooth, and there is no possible sawing or filing of it, then root out that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you remove it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's bite, and made of Indian iron extruded very sharply.
Be careful with your insertion into the mouth which is inserted in three days for the duration of the tooth, and that it not be confused with another tooth.
And if an eminent tooth is exposed to a file, then file it with iron from India, of which this is the shape:
It is all iron from India and the margin is ornamented; it is of many small points thus with file as the ones which are made agitated, as the tooth is filed little by little in many days to facilitate, so that no other tooth is confused and worn out. Then apply those to the mouth, and scrape them with sharp razors.
And if a tooth is of which a part is loose and touches the tongue, then cover it so that you smooth out the roughness of that fracture, and let it be applied so that the tongue does not lead to it nor the speech corrupt.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of worn-out teeth with gold foil or silver.
When teeth fall out due to concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot hold on to what they eat, and you have treated them with medicines that are applied to the gums, and your treatment has not been effective, then it is so that they do not cough up what is stuck in those that are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver becomes vert and soon deteriorates after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And the gold foil is in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the way of receiving it is that you take the gold foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuous layers of gold foil between two worn-out teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the web of the healthy tooth on the other side. And then iterate the process until you reach the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not worn out.
And be your stretching which strengthens the gold foil against the roots of the teeth that do not evacuate.
And then cut off the superfluous excess of gold foil with forceps or scissors, and add those to any place you gestured, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the worn-out tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue. And then leave it thus, stretched out like a Roman.
However, if it is dislodged or roughened, strengthen it or them with other gold foil in such a manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two worn-out teeth, thus as often these are linked:
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and are re-established thus as we have recommended, and they remain.
And do not do anything but be skillful artisans and wise.
And some bones of a cow are apt for certain causes, and it is made from them thus as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
On the insertion of the ligament which goes to the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which goes beneath the tongue sometimes occurs naturally in men who are born with it, or accidentally and suddenly due to a plague that has already consolidated.
And the operation in him is that you open the mouth of the patient, the existing tissue in the tie; and elevate the tongue, and then insert the nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
However, if in that there is some hardness or induration, and it has been established by consolidation of plague, then you inject an oil and divide it along the latitude until you have inserted the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fissure in the prier of the flesh and that you divide here artery and vein, and blood flows out.
And then wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licini; thus it is necessary that you hold the patient beneath the tongue in some night for so that it is not consolidated another time.
However, if blood flows out, pause over the vitreous location thrice treated; however, if the blood stops, then cauterize the location with a cauterizing iron that is suitable for this. And then heal it with other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens beneath the tongue an abscess resembling a small swelling preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnificent until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on them is that you open the patient's mouth in front of the window and examine the abscess.
And if you see a dark or black color, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is cancer.
And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onion on them, and insert that thin spatula, and insert the entire affected part; and if you see it coming out at the time of your operation, then you stop the three fingers, so it is vitriol, until the bleeding is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have treated the entire affected part, until it is washed with wine and salt; and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and from that which is nothing in the gullet and from other abscesses.
When you find in the gullet a godat, so they are glands that are assembled in a godat, which accelerate beforehand and are named two auricles, which when you treat them as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that which is iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that which is iron for the flow of blood; but let it be until it matures, and then you will operate on it, or it will break for itself.
And if it is of white color, radish-like, and its root is subtle, then that is what can be easily incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, during your operation, if already the abscess has rested with complete repose or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then do seize the patient in front of the window, and the head of them should be in the same place, and open their mouth, and the servant takes hold between their hands before the tongue of them, and holds an instrument most noble whose form is this:
And it should be made of silver or copper, and should be subtle with a cutting edge.
Then as you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and cuts above that in the same vein, then take an onion and place it on the wound, and pull it towards the affected parts as much as you can. Or another thing that you extract some cause from the tunics, and then you incise it with an instrument whose form is this:
Or another thing that you extract some cause from the tunics, and then you incise it with an instrument whose form is this: and it is assembled with forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed in a beaked shape.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then you incise it with a spatula whose form is that of them: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then make an incision on the patient's gums with cold water.
But if you induce a flow of blood, gargle with water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to those of the stopping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then take care of it until it is healed.
And some other abscesses are found in the gullet besides those two auricles, and incise them according to what you have said and done in the incision of two veins in the same way.
And you had medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in her gullet, the abscess which tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great stridor, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was perceiving death if she had stayed like that for one day or two.
And the abscess had so swollen up that it had formed two ridges until they opened up through two tracts.
Then you carefully opened it and placed it in one of their onions, and pulled it out, and extracted from the large portion, and then you incised that which you comprehended from the other tract, and then you opened their mouth, and comprehended their tongue, and then you placed the onion on the abscess.
And then you removed a large part of it, and no more blood flowed from it except a little. Then the gullet of that woman was absolutely clear, and she began to drink water, and then she received viands, so you did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and succeeded in incising it until it was prolonged.
Then you proceeded to cauterize the gullet of them, then you added an antidote; and then you walked around and did not know that God had done it for me.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a tumor when it becomes swollen.
When the tumor grows on the skin, and it becomes swollen and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Moreover, when it is cured in this way that we have said in the division, and your cure does not coincide with theirs, and sometimes it happens that the tumor has been removed from him and it is subtle, then it is necessary to incise those that are round and added; and if it is of long duration, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it does not affect his sentiment, then it is necessary to fear the incision of him, because in this case there is fear about the patient.
And when you see it according to the manner that you have been taught about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press his tongue with an instrument which processes its shape and then fixes the nail in the new moon, and pulls it down and incises it with one of two instruments which are said to be used in the incision of two membranes.
And it is necessary not to incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you incise more of him, you will disturb his ability to speak.
And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two membranes, and cure it from within so that it may be healthy.
Moreover, if the patient is frightened by the incision of him, it is necessary to use art in the cauterization of his fears, and the manner of the cautery on him is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in a straight position, and then press his tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make it come alive, and pause it neither sparse nor subtle, and of this complete the concavity of the instrument, the form of which is this.
It is the extraction of the intestine from the cavity in which the medicine was placed, thus like the intestine of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient spits over his shoulder for so that corroding saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one does not interfere with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not hinder any cause on his throat and that he is freed from that.
And then you place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it is degraded and seated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and envelop it over the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and then insert the ray with the cotton into a hollow cane so that the cotton adheres to it, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization will be abstracted in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped in a bandage, and manifest what is in the circuit of him from the medicine, and it is washed with cold water, and it is cured before embrocation, and freed from gargling until it is healthy.
And this species of cure is more saving than incision and longer in duration.
Some wounds are cured with the medicine that is more subtle than cautery and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: recipe calamint, ysop, origan, rue, scicados arabic, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a mixture, and they are submerged in a good wine, and boiled; and the mixture is well-cooked, and it is in a suitable place of the mixture, on which a conquering instrument of iron is placed according to this manner; it is made of silver or iron.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the cannula, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
And then repeat it on many wounds until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the coming of tumors, because it would too much adjust to the tumor, and it is not necessary to do this, but rather declare the tumor of him as cautious.
Moreover, if you do not have this instrument, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of him in a closed space, so that the patient's mouth is combined, because the closed space of the cane prohibits the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of spines and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Soft tissues adhere to the vertebrae or spine of the feet or some other cause.
Then you extract what appears obvious, on which the gaze falls, as you press the tongue with an instrument only solo, so that it may be declared what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, then you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause annexed to the throat will be purged by vomiting; or that the patient has eaten a piece of raw meat or of radish or a dry bread roll; or take a piece of marine sponge soaked in lion's fat, and tie it strongly with a thread, and then pass the patient through transgulated [areas], because when you perceive the place where they are spinning and extracted, then they will be purged. And take a eel and bind it with a strong thread, and place it on the table and subsequently extract it; or take a porpoise and subsequently extract the limbs and subsequently remove the entrails.
But if not purged through those causes which have been said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is so large that a small one is ruled out, and in the extremity of it is conquered the one that you introduce into its throat with ease.
And the old wise head is elevated in itself, and beware that you touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not deviate from its place or pierce the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
But however the patient introduces himself is better, for his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and he pierces within, and draws his hand with the instrument in himself, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is purged.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood from the throat.
When blood is medicated in that which has been said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforters, consider then the throat of the patient at sunrise, because you have comprehended the tongue of it with an instrument which you have recommended.
Then if you touch the blood, extract it with a small finger or with gentle and subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and introduce it into the throat of the patient, and place a pause in the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron, and do so many times (until the blood is dead and separated from the throat) and abstain from giving the patient anything to drink for a whole day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, and hold the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not transgress from any cause and mix the water for an hour, then place your hand on theirs, because the blood is drawn out as soon as it feels the cold water.
But if it is not purged through that which has been recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument which has been recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do it, for it is four days.
And it is another manner of operation in suffumigation of that, which is to take an oil lamp in which are ignited carbons and the lamp is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and compose the extremity of the instrument in that tube; and then give below the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not purged until you know that the suffumigation has penetrated to the blood, because the blood is drawn out four days.
And if it does not work, then you iterate the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drink, and eat salty foods and herbs, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed for purging.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape: Which is placed in the throat, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which is inserted a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not escape.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what you have remembered of them, from each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs through two manners, from which one is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and for that which is comprehended from the humidities.
And the second manner is to prop up the affected areas of the body, because an abscess that forms in the head is different from an abscess that forms in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them requires judgment for operation.
And most of the abscesses are such that they do not require to be opened but rather await maturation of the sanies in those or completion of their development.
So other abscesses are such that they require to be punctured when they become crossed, and do not mature according to their development, thus like abscesses that are near joints, because an abscess that affects a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess of a principal member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it matures, it will not harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, thus puncture the one that has not matured, due to incomplete digestion, but only the one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not prolong the pressure on it and it becomes elongated into the inner parts of the buttocks, and becomes a fistula, or it becomes an issue in the end of it that does not heal. You should know the time for puncturing the abscess, and thus it is when it is matured.
And you know that it is matured when there is reduction of pain and cessation of fever, and also decrease of swelling and pulse, and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And therefore you should know that puncturing is to be done in the place where the pus is below the abscess and where the pus comes out for a cure, due to the prominence.
And puncturing is always according to the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in places of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all swollen places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Most of the time when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay puncturing until digestion of it is confirmed according to its development, as we have said; because if you puncture it then, it prolongs the body of the pus and of bad matter, and thus the lips of the wound become hardened and the depth of it.
Most abscesses are punctured according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs treatment, or according to what the affected member indicates.
And you know that you should administer small puncturing, and in large abscesses a large and broad or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which you know that the codeina (skin?) should be cut and incised, when it is done thus, and it is in a term that already stiffens, like those that form in groups of douleness and bubbles.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus like the abscesses of the angles.
And of them that are in those which are administered round section and lunar section, and similar to those.
Most of the time, that which is not able to be thus like superficial abscesses, you know that you puncture it with a superficial puncturing, or only plane it slightly.
And you know that when the abscess is large and has already collected much sania, that you puncture it and do not try to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then you open the abscess again another day, and then you extract a larger part, and thus you make the matter evacuated gradually until it is fully cleared.
And it is especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved to evacuate the sania, and thus the patient will die, and you should open them.
You should keep this chapter with great caution, and thus perform your puncturing in which you puncture these abscesses, knowing that you will clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of oil or of anti-putrid matter; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncturing are many, then you know that you pause in some traction until they are fully cleansed.
And if in the abscess a part of the skin is detached or has concaved into the circuit, then you know that you complete it with much oil or with a flossing thread of linen, thus as when you have treated pans or razors, with humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and thus process it and cure what you know of the wounds until they are healed.
Mostly if you hasten the flow of blood in the hour of your operation, then administer cold water and wine agreeably in those muscles a cloth of linen, and pause it over the area of the blood flows most worn out.
Maybe if you preserve the blood flows, then it is fitting that you administer regimen and cure and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our free book and division.
Maybe if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is fitting that you apply poultices with wine and oil cautiously, and pause them over the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is fitting that you pause poultices soaked with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be very cold until the third day, thus as we have said, and then it is fitting that you dislodge the abscess and thoroughly clean it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be healthy.
And thus it is necessary to understand the cure of abscesses universally, maybe according to the way of distinction already said about all abscesses in which manner it is the way of curing them particularly for each singular head.
Chapter 41.
About the section of abscesses which come on the nape of the neck.
On the nape of the neck small abscesses, and these are of species of knots which contain tunics that are at their fact; and the species of theirs are very many.
And of them are pungent, and of those it is said that they contain humidity similar to lime. And of those it is said that they contain humidity similar to poultices, and resemble them; and of those it is said that they are rocky, hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since you must not make the extraction of those contrary to arthritis.
And the operation in the section of those is that you spread them with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, so that you know what they contain.
Because if it is said that they contain humidity, then you separate them in section according to the longitude per superficial section according to this form.
And it begins in the section of the line .B. until the line .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of it for any reason, because very worn-out returns, if it remains from some cause.
And then you submerge it in Egyptian inguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the plague and let it be until another day, because I believe that corrodes all so that it is removed from that skin.
And then you iterate over that spot with Egyptian inguent secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for it, until you are confident that no skin remains affected by any cause of that skin; then cure the plague with inguent until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you incise it according to this form: at the section having form of a cross, and cut between two lips of the section and scrape all that part, and force your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Maybe if you have arthritis that makes contradiction, then do so that you first reconsider primarily.
And similarly do in the abscessed section of the cure according to what you have said; and the section about the abscessed cure is less urgent, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some veins are like some of these abscesses which are on the head in some homes where there is no humidity; the cause is that you have incised upon an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus as a rough, bitter, white thing, which could not be extracted, and if someone was struck by it, they would plague that.
Maybe in the other abscesses that occur on the head besides this one, it is not about this chapter, thus as the abscesses that come on the heads of infants and one must remove the roots of the ears, maybe the section of all these should be superficial.
And pause the perforation of those from the lowest part of theirs for so that it is alleviated the pain of the wound at the lowest parts.
And then cure them with what is convenient for their cure.
Chapter 42.
About the section of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Many worn-out abscesses occur on the neck and in the axillas and in the joints; and some worn-out ones occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all of that scrofula is beneath its proper tunic, and thus as in the knots and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recommended.
And the special characteristics of these scrophulae are many, because some of them have rough surfaces, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you find in good disposition in the Touching, of which the color that is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is joined to the whole part, and not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and not swollen, so that you insert it into the superficial incision of the part above to the part below the line of G, entering the line of B, and scoring all over the part, and extending both lips of the codena to eleven inches if needed, as we have said in the apostemes of the head, and extracting it little by little.
And it is more cautious not to cut into a vein or nerve.
And it is better to not move the spatulum, so that you do not adjust your hand in incision, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; because if you cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the vetriol plaster trissat or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and lay aside that which rests on the quietness of the apostema and mollify the wound, and begin to be purulent. When the blood is absorbed.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then investigate carefully if there are any causes of the other small scrophulae, so remove them and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrophulae vein, then beware lest you do not cut that scrophulae from its root. Be careful lest you make a faulty double fold and let it fall so that it does not become inflamed.
And then fill the wound with a lot of cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian unguent, and then cure it.
And if you cut out the entire scrophulae, then beware lest you adjust both lips of the wound and cauterize as soon as possible so that there remains no superfluous matter.
But if you think that there remains superfluous matter because of the greatness of the scrophulae, beware lest you understand to cut out the root of it, and separate it, and apply a suture, and do what is said.
And those scrophulae that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here where it appears to you the place of maturation, and pause the perforation of what is dry below the body, as we have said.
And then apply perforation, with calves' unguent and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound being cleansed, then you cure it with unguent of generating flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the pilum of the accidental aposteme on the goulayre.
The ancients made this section in the pilum, and we do not see any man in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in the men who have expertise, beware lest the extraction of the pilum is avoided, as if it is not done judiciously for fear that all the veins and major parts of the patient may be affected.
But in those who have apostemes in the mouth or goulayre or two aurelhas, when the malady is not in the cane, beware of using the section of pilum to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
Then beware when you want to do that, that you cut out the pilum below three circles of the circles of the pilum, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the siphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from the son are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, beware lest he extends the cord of the goulayre to eleven inches, and then inserts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
And then cut out the siphac according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux which is of that essence which is of the disorder and for the absorption of the wound.
And then leave the wound open for some time.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add both lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And the doctor Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon he had recommended, is not just an exposition, but rather it seems that some of those apostemes have already opened the patient's belly, and the patient has entered into a mortal state, and their belly is being dissected, and some are going to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the area of the plague for some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason, I command that the opened plague be consumed into the patient's belly, so that the evil of the disease may be absorbed; and it is the evil of the disease that will take three days; and therefore, I command thus the plague, and heal it within, so that it may be sanctified.
And this is what I have seen through my observations, that a servant holds a candle and places it in the hollow of the patient's belly, and inserts a tube into a part of the lung canal, and I have called it the cure of the disease, and I have hidden the pus as the dead do, and uncovered the plague and hidden the blood which was affected by the small plague.
Then I must confess that I had not inserted a vein nor guided it, and the wind came out of the plague, and I healed it within so that it may be healthy.
And do not hasten the servant if it does not re-enter into the belly, and then return to the improvement of their own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
On the section about the aposteme that occurs in the belly before, and it is called hernia of the belly.
This aposteme called hernia of the belly is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not possible to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which the one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme that is made by occlusion of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not cover that which makes a presupposition about the iron except in the one that is small. And you prove that and investigate as I have told you, and if you find it similar to fatty tumors, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you insert it thus like the nodes, and extract the water that contains the fluid of the pellicle and bursicle; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly searched throughout the entire essence, and afterwards cure the place where it covers the cure within so that it may be sanctified.
Chapter 45.
On the section of the species of tumors.
There are many species of tumors and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And it covers that I recommend thus the difference between tumor and exostosis, as it makes doubt.
Then I say that with exostosis it is heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the superfluity is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But with tumors it is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cyphosis which is a ulcer in its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cyst and it is made thus like a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because one is fatty and contains humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Then it covers, when you come to the cure of tumors, that you expose that and inquire into the beginning with an instrument called intromes, according to which you will find its form in the chapter that is about to be cited.
And it is the manner of inquiry into apostemes and all tumors, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity in the aposteme, and you revolve the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the code.
And afterwards, you measure your hand according to the size of the greatness of the aposteme, and afterwards extract the intromes and consider what is left in the vestige of it.
And if the humidity has flowed out, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it into a superficial section according to what I have said about other apostemes.
And if from the vestige of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And it cuts into it in a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus you will ensheat it, and suspend that in oncises, and excorticate the code of all parts facilitated, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the sania from the tumor.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract the sania, and many things are seen at the end of that, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of any cause.
Because of the Roman disease from some unknown cause, little or too much, the node returns according to the months.
And if you see that the Roman disease has affected some small part, then complete the plague with some corrosive and acute powders, and pause on that which sits as a postmastectomy caution, and cure it from another curative entrance until it is healthy.
And if it is a large node, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure that which wraps around in flesh.
If the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsating, then you touch and fill the place of three triturations that are vitriol and let it stand for two days or for three until the plague is purged and the ebullition of the blood returns; and then return to scatter what remains of the node.
Chapter 46.
About the necessary forms of instrumentation in section and perforation.
About those which are the forms of introductions, and they are of three species, one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The form of the large introduction is this:
The form of the small introduction is this:
Made of iron, of aluminum, of decently prepared extremities, so that they fix the instrument in the apostemes.
And these are the forms of experiences, and they are named altered, and one of them is called verified.
And they are of three species, because one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experience, form of it:
The form of the medium experience, form of it:
The form of the small experience, form of it:
It is convenient that they are for those apostemes and exits and fistulas and swellings, so that they enter among those of the bones and of other causes.
And they are made of roots, thick ones, lions, thus with large needles as those which are sewn on the seats, and they are made of iron citrine, or of iron or of steel, or of silver, And the best ones are when they are made of iron citrine.
And they are made of the experience of black lead, which ones are in accordance that they push out the fistulas in the cavity of those which are reflexive, that they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
And they are of three species, because some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the structure of it.
Form of the large experience of lead:
Form of the medium experience of lead:
Form of the small experience of lead:
The forms of the hooks are of many species, because some of them are simple, which ones have a single curvature only, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
And they are hooked orps, and they are of three species.
And they are hooks having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And they are hooks having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, form of it:
Form of a large hook having two curvatures: Form of a medium hook having two curvatures: Form of a small hook having two curvatures:
Form of a large hook having three curvatures:
Form of a medium hook having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are those that cut and scrape the nodes and the apostemes, and they are of three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those which are made for sectioning so acutely and the other extremities not acute, and not paused in such a manner, but rather made to be joined in the excavation of the nodes the fear of incision of a vein or nerve, and for them to be healthy the patient and atroba tranquility a little for the adjustment which atroba gives to the excoriatio of the aposteme.
And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, thus with veils.
These are the symptoms of the disease and its similar characteristics that I have written about.
And it is in the outer layers of the affected pointed joint and in that curved space between the divided and deformed parts, when you wish, thus as you see.
The forms of pointing joints, which are hidden among the fingers due to the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the evils, and they are of three species: large, painful, and few. And these are the forms of those ones:
The forms of ventoses are those which obstruct the flow of blood, and they are of three species: large, painful, and few; the forms of it:
These are the symptoms of the disease cited, rounded and somewhat longitudinal, and these are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of ventoses are your large, painful, and few, so that for those obstructing the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you primarily do not have medicine.
However, they do not use them to obstruct blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy places, thus as in the hollows of the legs and thighs, and in the hollows of the arms, and of the breasts, and of the belly, and of the groin, and similarly to their fleshy hollows.
And some veins are affected by those other small instruments similar to thorns according to this form; through which the blood is obstructed when it is done by phlebotomy, or by cutting of a vein or artery.
And some veins are affected roundly according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Some veins are inflated in the breasts of some men who take pleasure in sleeping with women, and thus their breasts are inflated, and they are similar to women's breasts, and Roman doctors say it is a sign of lechery.
And to the one who suffers from that, it is necessary to incise those in a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then to excise the entire ugliness, and then to fill the wound with medicated ointment, and then to adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is inside until he is healthy.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude thus as in women, then it is divided into two lateral sections with sublayers, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which is contained in the other so that one ends where the other begins, until it is seen that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then excise the codena which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until he is healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which is necessary to cut for the sake of the patient's quiet, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive liquid and let it corrode what is rough from the grey matter, and then cure the one who is inside until he is healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are of the species of scrophulae, hard, which contain a fluid that is sacred.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to incise them in a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the sanity, then you complete the cotton veil and leave it inside for another day.
And then the cotton should be steady and be cured with a convenient ointment according to that, until he is healthy.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrophulae, then you should section above that thus as we have said in the section on scrophulae engulfment.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it the cautery according to what we have previously said about it.
Chapter 49.
On the section of abscesses that occur due to artery or vein.
When the artery is broken, and the codena is consolidated which is above that, then many veins occur with abscesses. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is due to the artery, it is often aggregated in the front of the body; and when you touch the abscess on the fingers, you feel a stridor in the vein.
And he who is affected by a vein is given a remedy for the apparent manifestation of the body.
The section above this abscess is an error, and it increases in those who are below the axilla, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is believed that the cure will be difficult, and he who is at the extremities, or at the head, should avoid it.
Maybe about he who is suffering from inflammation of the orifice of the artery, it seems that the section above the codena is obstructed in the lung; and then uncover the section with an incision and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then place the agulha (needle) above that and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to extract the two arteries that are in the temples.
And then push the place where it is between two ligaments with a spatula until you reach the blood that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment where it is engendered poorly until the ligaments relax; and then take care of he who has convenient joints to reach healing.
And if it is an abscess due to a vein section, then you should have your hand there where it is possible for the abscess in the codena, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and it will be with a double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with both ligaments according to what you have been told about the ligament of the grape, which is two parts at the extremities of the thread.
Maybe you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread into the needle below the entire abscess, from the incision of the primary needle, and stretch the tied threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until you situate what is in it, then you incise the superfluity of the codena, and thus what was linked to it is released.
And then pause about the pus that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment that is made with calves and joints until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus it occurs that an abscess in the artery and vein, and similarly an abscess in the nerves when it occurs from their percussion or occurs due to superfluous effort, and so on.
And it is made in the manner of it in the places of the adjustors or of the sole, or in every place where the joints are affected.
And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar in color to the other body, and it is among the major dispositions of its own kind, when it is tightly bound with vehemence, as if in the patient there is a stupor-like malady.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the chest of the body, and therefore it is below the codena, and it has affected the entire partition and does not go to the parts ahead nor behind.
Therefore, those who are in the joints do not believe that it is possible to be cured with iron, because they strongly contradict the contraction.
Maybe he who is at the head or on the forehead feels the codena with a spatula. Maybe if it is a small abscess, then you have those with forceps and extract it by its roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an incision, and excavate it, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On the section of abscess that occurs from the swelling that occurs in the abdomen.
It is even said that some people have many swollen abscesses in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal-like because of their similarity to fungi, whose root is subtle and the head of it is large; and already their lips are conversing, and it is about those who are small, and it is about those who are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in their abdomen there were two abscesses that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
And already their lips were turned inward and were split, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Therefore I incised those and applied a trotula to one of them in the form of 18 ounces. and the other one weighed 6 ounces.
And the operation on their incision is that you consider then if the malady is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and thus in your presence you apply cauteries to the focus, because many swollen abscesses are expelled much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
And if the patient is trembling with fear and terror, beware of inserting a hot iron; rather take a moderate amount of plum recent medicine, and strengthen it with that athereal, the manner of which we have described; and let it stand for two days.
Then adjust it in the structure of the plum thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large plum grain that is deviated in the thigh, until it is absorbed and falls for its troubles.
But if the thigh is of great size, then in its insertion it is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in one who has a belly.
But it is possible that you are mistaken about its nature, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to insert into the thigh one that is of dark color, of little sensation, of lazy regard, for that is a cancerous abscess.
And I will find a remedy for cancer and I will then remember it.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of hernia near the navel.
Hernia near the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the belly, and thus the intestine or bowel follows according to the other ruptures; or by bleeding from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the diaphragm and a slipping of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion-like pain, and then appears in diverse situations. And if it is due to an exit of the intestine, then the situation of that is like water that we have recounted, with more vehement diversity, and as you press on that place, it is hidden, and then returns; and thus it is in that place, and it is magnified much by the entrance of a bag and vehement trouble.
But if it is due to moisture, then it is a lion and is not hidden when you press on your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to bleeding, then the signs that appear are those of an abscess turning black.
But if it is due to a lack of flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to constricted ventilation, then the touch of it is lion-like.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the hernia near the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, or a vein, or constricted ventilation; then it is necessary to prohibit the treatment of it, because in that case there is fear and pain also as I have written in the chapter where I said about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the hernia near the navel is due to the bowel or intestine, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their belly still, and be standing upright; and then insert a tent in the circuit of the entire navel, and then command them to stand with their hands on their knees, and then encircle the space around the navel above the place where you have inserted the tent; and then extend the nature of the abscess to the upper parts towards an inch long; and then put it in the circuit with a strong thread or chain and the manner of the decent liar.
And then you will find the middle of the extended abscess above the ligament and insert the said thread into that index finger and where it meets the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the extruded matter and impel the intestine to the upper parts of the belly.
And if you have touched the intestine, then take it as a unit; and remove the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that much, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of a cross, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts above the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the extended flesh is consolidated and falls for itself; or remove what is subtle and falls away, and then cure it with water that is suitable for healing the wounds until it is healthy.
And if the hernia near the navel is due to a lack of flesh in it or moisture, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as I have said and expel the bleeding or moisture, which you find in it, and then cure it with water that is suitable and consolidates the place.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
I have said, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it is via a treatment of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid ulceration; and I have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of its treatment.
They described the ancient remedies that some experienced doctors used in places where it was possible to eradicate it, and thus with a crane-like device on the chest or thighs and similarly on the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it starts to feel a little better.
Perhaps when it is chronic and grave, one does not find that you appropriate for it, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor has it been overcome by that.
And the operation on it is as has been allocated, thus we have said, that you precede and lay aside the patient and purge of black cholera some experienced doctors, and then recognize that, if it is an obvious and manifest repetition.
And then prepare the patient in preparation for the operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncials that come to that; and then concave all parts of the code in a good perexcavation until nothing remains of the roots of it. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that leakage, and express the places, and clear out the large blood totally by your hand or with an instrument, which is at your disposal among the instruments.
Perhaps if you have caused a counter-flow of large blood into the vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood ceases, and then take care of it with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter five.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of the treatment of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altitudes alone, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hyposarca, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not combine your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already become debilitated, or is in another malady, another dropsy, thus as it is in the entire body or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Perhaps if you often see the patient with exuberant vertu, and in it there is no other malady except dropsy only, and not an infant nor old, then the manner of the operation on it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and minister to him the extreme of the belly with his own hand, by bringing water to the party below the navel, and then take spatum spinos according to this form:
It is of two sharp points long, of sharp extremity thus as spatum; perhaps meanwhile it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation on it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines, because then it happens that you are in the section alone with the navel for the quantity of three digits to the parties below, on the right side of the belly above the navel.
Perhaps if the generation of dropsy is due to malady of the liver, then your section is on the left side of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section is on the right side.
And do not find that your section is above the rib on which you want to place the patient so that the superfluities do not flow to that free location.
And then perforate with the instrument the entire code, and then enter into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatum between the code and the siphac, and you excavate it; and if the quantity of an ounce or around.
And then perforate the siphac until the spatum reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and enter an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold, on which in the lower part of it there is a small tract, and on its sides there are three tracts: two of one side and one of the other side; and the extremity of it is inscribed according to the manner of feathers, thus as often:
And on the upper extremity of it there is a hook, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends over the instrument, and evacuates the water at the same time in the same quantity, because if you evacuate from that same hour that does not find in the hour, strong death to the patient by resolution of the animal spirit, or it approaches the fifth crisis that is near death.
Perhaps evacuate from that according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what the dispositions of the patient's vertu of the pulses of it and its goodness signify to you.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it is retained by the code that retains the tract that is on the siphac of which I recommended to you that you perforate it according to this manner.
And then place the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and make them drink for several days with fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove the water slowly.
Perhaps you fear the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure that one who is buried in hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with drying medications until he is healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and mix it with the figs to extract the water, according to what you have recounted in that which has been previously written.
Chapter 54.
On the cure of children whose urine passages are not perforated.
Some born-from-the-womb of some children are from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is strait or not in its place).
Therefore, one should hasten to make a perforation of the womb as soon as it is born, with a very subtle spatula according to this form.
And then pause in the strait a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass for three days or for four.
And when one wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not leave this closure.
Perhaps that one whose strait is strait should be medicated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Perhaps those in whom the strait is not in its place, are led astray, which causes them to be among those who are born and whose strait is far from the end of the head of the bladder, so that they cannot urinate to the divided parts, until they elevate the bladder with their hand to the parts above; and it is not according to generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient is placed on his back, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the bladder at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as if it were an insertion of a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the mien of the vein seems like the head of the bladder and the strait falls into its proper place according to what is suitable.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens thus; and pause at the moment when you are about to cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
On the ulceration that occurs in the perineum at the head of the bladder and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder.
Many born-from-the-womb occur with this ulceration in the bladder and it is a great emission of flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is suitable that you suspend with a subtle hook and cut off that until it is totally removed; and then pause on the underlying skin submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the patient with daily dressing until he is healthy.
And if the ulceration is malignant, of bad color, then it is suitable that you administer cautery at the insertion of it and the root of it.
Perhaps if the ulceration is in the perineum of the head of the bladder of the uncircumcised, and one part of the ulceration is deep in the perineum and the other part is outside, then it is suitable that you remove the ulceration which is deep from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
And also it happens in the genitals and in the black and corroded perineum, therefore it is suitable that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply a line upon that with good milk, which is contaminated with flour of scorched millet and of bitter roots and crivellations.
And then cure it with the other cure until it is healthy.
Perhaps if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form.
because juvenile cautery is at two disposed moments, thus it is a flow of blood and at the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the bladder is corroded and is destroyed entirely at that hour, then it is suitable that you introduce into the meat of the perineum a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not occur except in that one whose perineum is thus, and upon which no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) it is suitable that you excoriate with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is delivered from all parts.
And if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then be aware that you should excavate around some cause of the head of the bladder and of the prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce is subtle, but it is perforated by its subtlety frequently.
And then separate the prepuce from the head of the bladder with a subtle instrument, which has already been mulched in the cold water to prevent it from adhering to another place.
And then it should be cured by a fixed stipetic treatment inside so that it is consolidated.
Chapter 47.
On the purification of children and the cure of those things that occur to those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity and thus with the other plagues: but rather it is of our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and way, lest they lose their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in some of their free laws, because they did not use them in their laws, and it is only because they had acquired it through experience, which causes them to have discovered the majority part of the artifices and barbarities using circumcision and purification with a new and tortuous method; and they used to lament with a faithful and insidious unguent.
And thus they have prohibited all these methods and did not discover a better purification with forceps, with a faithful unguent that in purification with the nail, because many times it escapes downwards, because the code of the prepuce has two tunics, and one removes the tunic underneath, and thus it is forced to another incision and secure pain. And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and is digital, which the Sabatiers use, it is not safe to incise the extremity of the virile member, because thus it enters into its tract.
But in the operation with the nail, thus it obstructs iron and corrupts your operation. And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it becomes so accustomed in this manner that there is no need for purification, and thus I have seen it.
But about the purification that is done with forceps and faithful unguents, goodness, experience has taught me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which the acuteness that is downwards is thus like the acuteness that is underneath; and so as you press your hand so proportionally on both sides, and incise thus according to a comparison in one time; and it is done with compression of the faithful figure containing the code of the bladder of the entire part, in which there can be no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you should not do otherwise than to place the faithful in its bladder only so long, and that you leave it there until another day.
And then do that in order to rejoice in all that manner which is at your possible ability to receive its intelligence. And then make that stay between your hands prepared and established, and do not be careless; and hide the forceps in your hand or underneath the towel, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the bladder of it and blow on the code, and pull that out so that the head of the bladder is exposed, and then purify that from what is aggregated in it of filth.
The shape of the forceps for purification, this is the shape:
Some of the extremities are not-taloned and others are taloned, so that they do not obstruct the branch of the nail, and it is the length of the two acutenesses thus like the length of two manual grasping extremities.
But the error in purification is because thus it escapes the entire internal code, or part of it deviates from the incision.
Therefore, be aware that you should extend it at your hour with your nail during the postulation of the place and that you incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and incise it.
But if three days have passed, and meanwhile it has inflated underneath the postulated bladder, then you let that out so that the postulated aposteme is calmed, and excavate that with facilitation, and incise that according to your preparation.
Beware of the head of the vein, for it will not reach that water.
And so cure that water which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is situated on the back of the measure, and you have placed it under the parts above, that water does not reach it.
And greater cure that water which we have said enters so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by stone or congealed blood, or by poultice or by flesh, and similarly to those things that we have said about the manners of treatment in the division.
And if the water that we have said is vehemently made the cause upon the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It is of silver and subtly curved conquering, thus like a canal of penance of subtle Ausonian subtlety in a ray long as a palm and a half, to which the cane is subtle at its head.
And the manner of injection of urine for this is that you take the doubled thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good ligation; and you insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syringe, and you push them with the forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, more you introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you tie the syringe with a bandage and album of Huou.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and embrace the bladder with it and the vein with olive oil and agarics.
And then insert the syringe to facilitate its entry into the root of the vein; and then double the vein above at the part of the umbilical; and then fill the syringe with that; and then fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and this cures the patient of the void cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuousness.
And then extend the thread into the wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use a syringe, do not stop doing that until the bladder is evacuated and the patient obtains great alleviation.
Chapter 59.
On the quality of cleansing of the veins with a clamp and similar instruments which are suitable for that.
When there is ulceration or aposteme in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
but in the extremity of it is a hole, so it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two on one side, thus many times.
In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is impelled, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that, it is added, until when some cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clampcedra in which there is phicated naphta in the battles of the sea.
Then when you want to draw humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with that water which is impelled above the parts, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the vein according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills it, because this humidity reaches the bladder at once, and the patient feels that.
Form of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is above and is similar to a small feather, and below the cane is divided into threads.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a doubled thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the crystal extremity into the scrotum.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with humidity, as the structure descends into it, so that the patient's humidity has already penetrated the bladder.
But if you are not present with the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those channels, so that they are well-revolving; and then add the circle as it is also added to the bladder, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidity, and other and ague.
And then you tie that to the instrument and do it so that it has been done as in the bladder, and express with your hand inside so that the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Chapter 60.
About the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the species of stone and cure of them with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone on which one operates with a hand, and surgical removal.
And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is stuck in the bladder.
And I will now narrate that in a clear and brief exposition.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his groin, and many times pen, and then it is prepared; and at that time the flow is open, and the colon is emptied of those matters.
And it is rare to see the healing of children with that condition until they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in old people. But in young people it is easier because it is between those.
And of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with crystal which extracts all the filth that is in the sick intestines; because that filth sometimes prohibits the eviction of the stone, and its inquiry.
And then be near the patient with your feet and be steady and hold him strongly so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, or jumps out from its place sometimes with many efforts.
And then make that circle between your hands prepared, and his hands are placed below, so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
And then seek all of that and remove it entirely from there.
Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then you will quickly operate on it with surgical removal.
And if you do not catch the entire thing from below, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the mentioned place with your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the mentioned finger if he is a young adult, and insert it into the anus. And remove the stone until it is below the mentioned finger. And gently guide it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your finger, and expel it to the outer parts before it reaches the place of surgical removal.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand to the outer parts above, and with his other hand hold back the cord that is below the genitals, in preparation for the place of surgical removal.
And then insert the spatula beneath the incision of which this is the form. and separate the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but beside the left thigh; and let the surgical removal be on that stone and the finger is in the anus, and let it be a transverse surgical removal, so that the surgical removal from above is wide and straight according to the quantity that I need to remove from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because for sure you will compress the finger which is in the anus with the stone, and it is forgotten, its difficulty.
And you know that some stones have an angle and edges, because their removal is made difficult by that.
And of that water it is like a bean, and it is round, and its removal is made easier.
Therefore if it is that one with angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, then it is necessary that you operate on that, or that you hold it with your gestures decently, the extremity of which is like a file on which you hold onto the stone, and do not let it escape; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
If you cannot stand on that, then amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, remove it with a strong vinegar solution.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the opening of the bladder, and insert it inside; and then insert a small instrument as well; and it seems that if there are many stones.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you insert it into a big section, because it hurts the patient for two reasons: either it kills or it prevents the continuous flow of urine, which is why the place is not fully consolidated.
Administer expulsion of it from the inside so that it is forgotten, or ingeniously in the fracture of its arm with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And put a dressing on that wound infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and fresh water, so that the postrema (abscess) may be calmed.
And then reposition the patient on their back, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
And when that has been disturbed, bathe the area with water and much oil, and then take care of it with continuous daily treatments and continuous medications until it is healed.
If in the wound there is an abscess that causes corrosion, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the obstruction of the blood in the urine), then insert a tube into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and apply opposition to all species, with that which is convenient for the cure until it is healed.
And take care in all hours of the entire cure that you read and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and it is in the meat of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure it with that which you have recommended beforehand, because many times they pervert the section, and this accusation is made of section; and already you have experienced this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron like a file, of which this is the form.
of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in wood.
And then take a file, and tie it to the bladder below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facilitation until the perforator reaches that stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until you make that from the other part penetrate; because the urine is then absolute.
And then put your hand on that which is remaining of the stone from the partition before the bladder, because it is triangulated, and it is forgotten in the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this cure does not appear to you due to some cause that prohibits it, then tie a file below the stone, and another file above the stone. And then enclose the stone in that bladder between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then remove the bandage and cleanse the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bandage with a file below the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, because when the file is removed, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary to you when you lift the file above, that you elevate the cord to the upper parts, or return to give completion to the tube, and close the wound as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stone from women.
Stone in women is rarely generated.
If you see a stone in some of those, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman's bladder is very narrow.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who is wise enough to describe the measurement of the meter when it is cast, or it is among women who have married.
The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the section on stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because it induces a profound section, and in that there is fear.
If it is necessary to provoke you to this water, then take care that you receive a moderate scientific bath, and few are accustomed.
But if you are deprived of that water, then seek a subtle and refined scientific treatment, or present a wise and experienced midwife in the art of women's feet, or a woman who in this art has divided the art.
Then make that present, and command her to do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; which cause is that they verify if the woman is virgin, then take care that you put the urine in a container and examine the stone.
Then if you obtain that, remove it from the urine, and then command her to inject above that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert the urine into the cavity of the womb and examine the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and grasps it with good comprehension.
Then if you obtain that, then take care that gradually you remove it from the orifice of the bladder to the divided parts below as much as possible with your virtue entering into that channel until you reach the root of the thigh.
And then inject above that application of the marrow of the cavity to the root of the thigh of whatever part is paralyzed and place the stone in that area, and the urine of it will not be retained by the stone, removed from it.
And the section is few at the beginning; and then insert the ray above that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from that.
And you know that the species of stones are many: some of them are few and large, and leon and aspran, and long and round, and have roots.
Then you know how many species are of it for the water that you signify above what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place of the vitriolic trissat and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
And make that you prepare yourself with the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then stop powdering on the spot and strengthen those pulvils and descending structure, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because very soon the womb will die. And then cure the wound.
Then when the sharpness of the blood is calmed, then apply cooling journeys, and the spot will be purified, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia and rupture.
Hernia rupture is not but an aggregation of humidity in the white cavity which is below the code of the genitals containing the humors, and it is named cavity.
And some digested things are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the part of the humors, until it is known that already there is another humor; and it is the code of the genital between the white cavity which we have said, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because at that time it is founded on this matter, and some veins affect by percussion made above the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and filthy, or it is whitish, and that is what is more.
And the signs for which it is known on this aggregation of water are these: because if it is in the white cavity which we have said, then the apostema is red and declining a little in longitude thus like the figure of a humor, and appears the genital, because the humidity contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in its own panniculus, then the apostema is red in the part of the humor and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the code of the genitals and the white cavity, then it falls below the sentiment.
And as you want the cognition of the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the apostema amidst the Cartesian form of which the shape is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the intestines, judge that it is deduced from that.
Then when we come to the cure of the iron wound, then take care that you command the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes touch the side of the patient.
And then place a poultice on the back above some cause a little higher up, and pause until the worst pain subsides.
And then place your seat on the left side of them, and command the servant to follow on their right, which extends its rod about two hand lengths from the knee joint to the division of the miraculous belly.
And then take a wide spatula and separate the knee joint from my usual place for the entire length of the thigh to the inner thigh.
And make a section according to the correct alignment of the distant line that governs the skin of the knee joint, until it reaches the white cartilage comprehending.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure it; and your scraping is the one which that scrapes for the part of the joint that is suspended in the hollow and subtly examined in the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the white cartilage full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with an incision, and extend the cartilage to the upper parts; and do not touch the knee joint comprehending, and injure the cartilage in that manner which is as much as possible. And injure it in its entirety or in pieces, and subtly enlarge the wide back, for if you do not precisely examine the injury of them, it is not done securely so that the water does not return.
But if the hollow of that defect of its knee joint is in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cartilage, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the knee joint with a suture, and then cure it thus like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the hollow corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you remove the veins which are above the suspensors, and extract the hollow, and then cure it in the way that we have said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts together, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore injure that part according to what you have done on the other alignment; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you purify the blood, and enter into the clear sections submerged in oil or in rose oil; and pause before another section which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over both knees and the miraculous belly; and pause above double drapery and pulvils, and tie them above with a ligament according to this form.
And then press two drapery and fill the carmenated wool according to this resemblance; and make the extremities with which it is premised of cotton or humid wool, and add structure in the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the back up to the two, and the second takes from the part of the thigh, and two extremities above two thighs below and two other extremities above two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
And some veiled hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutting cautery and injure on the knee joint of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white cartilage containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form. And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
And then pierce the cartilage, and ignite until all humidity is driven out.
And then extend the cartilage with an incision, and scrape with an incision, and scrape with a subtle ignited cautery; and injure that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the hollow that the fire does not touch.
And you know that this operation is more salvageable and more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation on the section.
But if you find contradiction or apostema in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is necessary that you cure what contradicts you for that, with a suitable cure which converges to them according to what has been said.
But if the patient is poor, and does not expect the second operation due to its horribility, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended for that; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which we have said about the signs, that this hernia is aqueous.
Then it is necessary that you place the patient on some elevated bed, then pierce the apostema in the lower part of them with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And make a broad perception until all the water is drained out.
And then pause on the short place and lift that and let it flow, so that the current of the water flows. Then heal the wound from within so that the plague is healthy.
Perhaps it is contrary to the flow of water at that hour you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white bandage in the orifice of the wound makes a contrariety and prohibits the emission of water, then it is necessary that you put on the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropics, the form of which is preceded; or adjust on the opposite side of the wound a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and it is helped by a proper six months or in those surroundings; and when it is aggregated, then it should be perforated according to that same method, because the patient will pass the six days.
Chapter 63.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
You know that in the section about this hernia, there is great fear of losing it permanently in the major dispositions; because to me it seems the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
And you should remember the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: or for acute sharp inflammation, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And therefore it is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel to the touch.
And some abscesses are made for swelling of the arteries, and for inflammation of those as well which has already been perceived, or for inflammation of veins.
Perhaps it is for inflammation of arteries that is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it compresses them in the tight tissues; and it does not seem that it touches.
Perhaps what is done for inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause, but rather by compression in the tissues.
And it is possible that on this species a section was made and on the other carnal parts; and it is that you cut the code of the genitals, and then stop at the joint above, and extract that from the white ciphac, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and cut the suspensors so that you remove all the parts of the joints.
Therefore if the joint is already consolidated in those carnal parts, then it seems that you should extract the joint and cut it.
And if there is adhesion within some cause of the ciphac, or between what is between the veins, then it seems that you should remove all that adhesion and cut it for a rounded incision.
Perhaps it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it seems that you should cut all that which is of it, and extract the joint as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then heal that with another cure within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia that is of wind.
Wind is an abscess enveloped by some envelopment similar to a broth with mollification of the testicles, and it is done with difficult movement exercise and ambulation on the patient.
And in the cure of this illness it is by fear for that which is preceded by memory.
However, I think that I should describe operation on that one according to what the first ones did.
And I say that it is necessary to seat the patient on a raised chair; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then cut the code of the genitals in the tight tissues among the veins which are probable at the verge; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then cut into the spatium widely through a transverse section in the right of the veins within so that the discovered veins are opened.
And then excavate all the parts as you have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle which is double-fil, and lift that in the first of the places where you find wind, and lift that other vein in the back of them. And then cut into those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healthy and are generated by so that the veins fall, which nourish one of the two genitals, because it is not bad for that.
If the veins are blocked in all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract or remove the blockages from them, so that they can receive all their nourishment for the growth of the vessels, and they are strengthened, or so that there is no hindrance in those.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that occurs when the diaphragm extends over the belly, on the part of the angles of the miraculous cavity of the belly, so that the intestines from that rupture move towards those intestines.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of the excretion of it, and it is caused by these two special motives for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy object, or by similarity.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it gradually increases over a long period of time, and does not suddenly occur, and it is a gathering of fluid between the chest and the belly, so that the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a rupture of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it suddenly causes vehement pain; and it is a gathering of diverse apparent symptoms below the navel, which is due to inflammation of the intestine, and this is why it hurts in the parts above the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestines are protruding out of the belly like a finger, and this is called intestinal hernia umbilical.
And sometimes it is made worse by vomiting, and sometimes the intestine breaks in the belly, and here it is retained, and this is why there is great suffering of the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and worsens when it is premature.
And in the cure of these species of this disease iron is used, because it is necessary to remove the obstruction from that place.
And the manner of operating on this is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity through the natural passage of its conquest, if it obeys the usual return, and then place your hand over the area between the thighs, and raise their legs.
And then stop the navel which is the navel of the vessels at the bottom, and you insert the navel of the vessels totally for the length; and then fix two lips of the ulcerous section together according to how they are indicated to close the ulcer in those.
And if the ulcer is according to the quantity that you think it is possible that from that the hole may be protruding out.
And then you excavate that part which is below the navel of the vessels, until it is discovered the white and hard diaphragm from any part.
Then you introduce the finger into that place where it is the vessel, in which it is between the white diaphragm, which is below the navel of the hole, and between the diaphragm above, and absolve from that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
And then you hold the hand at the navel of the vessels in front, and also extend the white diaphragm with your left hand, and raise the hole to the diaphragm at the part of the ulcer; and command the servant to extend the hole downwards and dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And search with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white and hard diaphragm. If you find any cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly below.
And then you insert in the part below the navel of the vessels for the ulcer of which it cures and heals, thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then you administer the submerged oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and sometimes the white diaphragm is cauterized, which we have said, and then the intestine of the flux of blood, because many times it causes those) and release the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the treatment of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured over, and stop on that inside which falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with another cure of the wounds within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the treatment of it with iron.
And the first doctors said that it was done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is in you; which is to place your fingers near the section over that part of yours that has been facilitated by it; and then cut in a suitable place around the abscess, so that the veins fall.
And heal the wound according to what we have said, so that it may be cured.
Chapter 67.
About the disruption that occurs in the ankle joints.
Some swollen veins break rupture in the ankle joints thus as we have said, and empty the place.
And they do not show any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
If the time is prolonged in this, an adjusted fissure is made in the groin area so that the intestine descends into the groin; and it happens for the extension of the groin which is in the ankle joints thus as we have said, which causes the groin to be extended, and then it becomes soft and the place becomes infected and empties.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery thus as it was preceded by the narration of it.
And some swollen veins are cured with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two legs, and then cut the place of the rupture of the abscesses empties in section according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white groin area that is above the knee, so that it may be discovered.
And then take the stick and stop it on the prominent place of the groin area, and press it to the navel.
And then kiss the two prominent places above the extremity of the stick of the groin area, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the stick, and do not insert into the groin at all, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause thus as you will know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then heal that with the treatment of wounds, and as it inserts into the veins, purify it and restore the wound so that it may be consolidated; because the groin is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more suitable for health.
Chapter 68.
About the softening of the knee of the testicles.
Many swollen veins in the knee of the testicles in some men are softened thus because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe it.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is engaged in the treatment of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire knee which is softened above the natural knee; and then adjust both lips with a suture.
And if you want, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened knee with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by healing of the other wounds so that it may be healthy and the veins fall.
Chapter 69.
About castration.
You know that castration in our law is forbidden, but I was led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, of which one is so that it may be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows the treatment of it and happens; and the other reason is that we many times have need of castration of other beasts for our young ones, thus as of mules, and of oxen, and of pigs, and similar to those beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by making a section.
Moreover, in that which is done by attrition, the way of operating is that we make the beast drink warm water so that its genitals become softened and loosened and hang. And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear to touch anymore.
Moreover, in castration done by making a section and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the knee of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders, and insert over each hole in one section so that two holes proceed.
And then insert those poultices that you will have extracted from the corrupted humor. Do not place them on the area of the affected hip, but rather the subtle ciphal which is above the veins.
And in this manner of cauterization it is better which is done for attraction, because strong attraction draws out some cause of the testicles, so that the beast desires coition.
And then heal the wound from within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of Hermaphrodosia.
Hermaphrodosia in men is of two kinds: one is when it appears that the space in the channel of the testicles is narrowed, in which case a figure like a woman's cunt appears.
And some urines that come out from that corrupted urine which is in the channel of the testicles.
In women it is a species: and it is that the cunt of the woman on the perineum is also like two testicles of a man, almost entirely hidden and partitioned off as if by the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two in men and one species in women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted carnals within so that it expels the impression of that, and then you will cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men, from which urine comes out that is in the channel of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 21.
On sterility and prominent flesh caused by women's influences.
Sterility is adjusted according to natural causes within so that it is restrained and is made light by observation; and some urines are magnified in some women so much that they spread like in men and pervade into the coitus.
Then it is necessary that you hold the superfluity of sterility with your hand or with a hook and insert it.
And do not push in the insertion, rather in the area of the root, so that there is no efflux of blood.
And then heal it with the cure of the plagues within so that it may be healthy.
A born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horrifici of the matrix within so that it fills that, and it is said to be at the partitioned areas beforehand according to the likeness of a snake (and for this reason some first-called appellants called it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we insert it thus as we insert sterility, and cure it within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of gout.
Gout is when the cunt of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to the hernia that has preceded it, and that is done or by flesh not adjusted or by subtle ciphal or by specific.
And it is done or in the area of the matrix, or in its sides, or in the upper pus, or in the lower pus, and it prohibits coitus and impregnation and infantation, and therefore it prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is done by observation of the womb, if the obstruction is apparent, it is propagated; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the ties of the finger or with the ray.
But if the obstruction is due to subtle ciphal, and it is propagated to the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that which pauses over the two labial pulvils, and then pause with the fingers indicating from both hands to the most interior.
And the woman is on her back, her extended legs spread apart, and then extend the two labia into force so that the subtle ciphal is ruptured and the obstruction is opened.
And then take a lantern and anoint the fourth oil and pause that over the place, and shout at home on the day so that the place is not consolidated.
But if the ciphal is large and specific, then it is necessary that you insert that with a broad spatula or a fennel of myrtle.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with a hook, and insert it.
And there are your medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, like haematostasia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted in a book of Uhou.
And then administer a wide poultice of broad lead so that the plague is not consolidated lightly.
And hold that for several days and administer lukewarm water of the third.
And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation within so that it may be healthy.
And some old writings agree in the native birth of other fleshes, and then it is necessary that you insert according to this manner. More it happens that it is due to aposteme cancers, the aposteme cancer which is in the matrix does not create contrary heat in any manner.
Chapter 23.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and of tail and red botch that suddenly occur in the groin area of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated for the orifices of many veins that enter there, where the corrupted blood flows continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and are made by them.
And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will tell you which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the womb of the matrix and do not appear to the sense, then in those cases there is no treatment at all.
However those that are in the orifice of the matrix above which catch sense, those are the ones that can be cured.
And I advise that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extract the piles with the forceps, or with a sharp hook, and insert them into the roots.
And then powder over those from which the flow of blood comes, one of the powdered medications that are specific for moderating, thus it seems to be similar to those.
And then soak the sick feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and of scorches of millet-grass and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and knead that with honey and wine, and make an emplaster with that on the back of the patient.
And if the blood is abscessed, it is so; and if not, make adhere to two warm vents, and to the nipples with scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in juice of coliac or juice of angelica or juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the place; and then cure the place with an ointment until it is healthy.
And cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the perforation of accidental hernia in the matrix.
Many species of apostemes suddenly occur in the matrix, such as cancer and aposteme lapidem and ulcers and adherent and erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids and ragueries and thyl and other apostemes. And I have already said about these evils and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And I advise that you read in this treatise on aposteme how the one that is in the matrix when it is of those apostemes that suddenly occur, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of that is made at all.
Therefore I advise that you consider if the pain of the aposteme in the sick commencement is acute with percussion and flecm and fever, and sometimes it becomes worse and catches sense on that, then do not touch it at all, and cure that with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then I advise that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below her knees, and tie it with a ligament according to what is convenient.
And then the midwife follows the straight path and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, in the form of which you will see in those causes that will be treated then.
And I advise when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the womb of the matrix of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the matrix is not more than the womb of the matrix and leads to the evil. However if the instrument is larger than the womb of the matrix, then I advise that you place powders on the texture of the womb of the matrix so that it prohibits the entrance of all instruments into the womb of the matrix.
And I advise that you pause the vertebral column that runs in the instrument of the straight path from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until it is opened into the orifice of the matrix.
And as it appears the excretion, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then I advise that you separate it from the head of the patient with a spatula.
And when the sania is evacuated, then I advise that you place in the plague a submerged meca in rose oil or green oil in which there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section in the womb of the matrix.
And stop beforehand the mother and on the entire surface of the mundified skin submerged in water, where evil humors are driven out.
Then it should be treated for two days with an ointment that brings the humor into harmony, so that it may be healthy within.
And some vegetables are washed with the mother and the plague is thus Christened in water and honey, and then in the water where the evil humor of ire or long-lasting aristology is driven out, and then it returns to the ointment.
And if the plague is deeply rooted in the affected mother, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of that iron, having no care for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To instruct the midwives in what manner they should deliver babies well, so that they are medicated according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth through signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing herself with the parts below and desires to smell the air, and above this is rejoiced by what is above her, and hastens the emission of the baby, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it above the sixth cap, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the navel.
So when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly of it be compressed so that the baby descends lightly, as if it were being pushed above the sixth cap, they push it to the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous abundances with good moderation.
Moreover, that which is another part is not natural and not praiseworthy, because when the baby is emitted above its feet and the body of it is emitted before its head and its feet, and its mother's hand, or at its foot. or it is emitted with its head and its mother's hand, or at its belly, and forth it is converted above the sixth column, and resembling the non-praiseworthy figures of it.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she should guard against error and deception.
And you have shown the entire figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it may be signified by what and stands above what.
When the fetus is emitted above the sixth cap by natural gravity, and that is vehement against the woman and makes her part difficult, and sees the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that the women hold it, and evaporates the conjunction of it with fenugrec cotyledon and olive humectant.
And then insert the measuring rod between the sixth fingers of the spatulum, small and closed in that the second one, or dry that with its own nail so that it corrodes what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
Moreover, if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crusted with a poultice of ptilli and a poultice of fenugrec with cizami.
And then command it to her, and crust it with a poultice, so that it is compressed and makes that stornudar with condition; and close its mouth and nostrils for an hour, because the fetus will be fully ejected soon.
And if the two parts of the fetus are not fully ejected at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with facilitation. Moreover, if it does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then conceal the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the more are not deeply turned and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remnants of the fetus or tie the corpse to its mother with a cloth and extract that with equality, because it will be fully ejected.
When the fetus is above the six feet, then it is necessary that you impel those upwards, and then convert the fetus little by little, and then engulf that, and then take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
Moreover, when they are emitted into the thighs, then you command it to emerge, and make that extrusion with condition, because it will be fully ejected if God wills it.
And if it is not fully ejected in what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little into its pause according to a natural figure, because it will then be lightly emitted.
And if it is prohibited from all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altea and dissolved gum, and percussion everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then bind it with the conjunction of the woman, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that cesarean section in tepid water, until you obtain the hypogastria.
When the separated parts of the body are numbed, then do the subtle fumigation of myrtle and pause that on the patient. And when you have done the fumigation for an hour, then seat yourself on a chair, and place that stool under him, and stop the mouth of him, and lift it up, and press the lower part of his belly with a gentle compression, because the flatulence will be thus forced out.
Examine the foot carefully during one of his hands. It is ingenious in the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her go there.
And if she cannot go, then place the mattress on the bed, and shake her thighs with a vehement concussion, and then administer gentle blows which you have prepared with poultices.
And if the inflammation has come, then seat yourself on a chair, and study the reduction of his hand, and place the feet according to their natural figure, and stop the woman and command him to compress himself until it is forced out.
Examine the feet on the expanded joints, his hands, and the surface of his feet are towards the back of his mother. So that the midwife holds the hand of the foot and gently turns it little by little, and thus it is facilitated.
And when it is thus and you have manipulated it, then pause on the joint of his foot which we had prepared with oil and poultices.
And command him to massage little by little, and when you have done that, then seat yourself on a chair and command him to be inclined over the straight side, and command him to be compressed; and stop the woman with condition. The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
When you have seen the horror of the mother according to this method, consider it, and then you inject the second finger into your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the foot is suspended above the face and neck of his, then you inject that of the emetic, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then you apply the feet to the inner parts until it pauses according to what is suitable, and send the woman to compress herself in some voided places, and it will be forced out with a gentle examination, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. You know that many twins are born void, and some women have three or four, but that is strange and it's an effort to understand; but I know the causes are not natural, and do not live.
And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and are separated by cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of those; some voided places are forced out thus as one fetus for natural examination, and some voided places are examined without labor thus as we had prepared.
And if they are difficult cases of their deviating from the inflammation and arriving at what we had said about the unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we had recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does to facilitate and subtlety, and delays it, and is ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared for the ingenuous amenity of health.
Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women are formed in the womb one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman aborts at six, and another X has all forms, which causes a false measurement of the glorious savors.
And all this is covered in the science of the midwife because it is strong enough to reach that small similarity of that, and therefore stops at that which I cover.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the established practice, and you are still forced to use your own operation, then consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and not at risk of accidents for which there is great danger.
Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a soft mattress on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
And the midwife should hold that part of the two parts or be tied to the mattress so that the body of the woman does not spread out during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you will humidify the mother's womb with ointments and with mucilage of marshmallow root and of fenugreek and of licorice.
And then the midwife will anoint her hand with those ointments and mucilages, and then insert her hand into the womb to facilitate it, and then approach the place where the nails are in the fetus.
And in this convenient place: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be turned onto its back, and then you fix the nails in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or in the beard, or in the armpit, or in the places proper of the ribs, or in the hypochondries.
Perhaps if the turning is towards its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the nail with your right hand, and stop the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand to facilitate and fix the nail in some of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the internal cavity.
And then stop and fix in the application of another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude as much as possible.
And thus you will have completed the whole procedure, so that the extraction of it is alleviated as if it were done with ease, without any difficulty.
And it is necessary that in this case what is between them, the extension should be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and revolve in that place which is retained.
Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails are permitted to enter the place where it was previously; and do it thus until the entire fetus is expelled.
Perhaps if the hand is exhausted beforehand, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract that until everything is expelled, and insert it or in the joint of the hand or in the curve.
And thus it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and in both feet.
Perhaps if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to contract in the extraction, or it is in the head of the water adjusted, then it is necessary that you insert between the fingers spatula-shaped instruments and break the head and extract the water, or that you use an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
And similarly it is done if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then it is necessary that you cut with an instrument, or that you take with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and contracted from the armpit, then it should be opened until the humidity which is in the chest is expelled.
Perhaps if it is not complicated, nor does it obstruct the extraction, then you will cut the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
And if the retention of the abdomen is postulated or is in its hydropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the humidity that is in it is cleared.
Perhaps if the fetus is towards its feet, then its attraction is lighter and the direction of it to the mother's mouth is lighter.
Perhaps if it is contracted from the abdomen and chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and that you open the abdomen and chest until what is in them flows out.
Perhaps if the other members are exhausted and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; perhaps if the mother's mouth is opened, then she inserts her hand into the pubic area, and approaches the head, and pulls it out with her fingers until it reaches the mother's mouth, and then inserts one nail, or two nails, and pulls it out with those.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by postpartum caution, which happens to it, then it is necessary that it not be troubled about it; instead, it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid, greasy causes. Administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the foot is on the side of the bed, then if possible, it should be elevated: and administer what we have said to do in the preceding foot.
And if that is not possible, then insert poultices, and extract.
And be careful not to leave any underlying cause of the disease untreated.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostemes caused by bad humors.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And you have already seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and then apply another pregnant woman's excrement over that focus, and then the dead fetus is cast out. It happens to you that a long time ago an abscess was on the diseased womb; and it swelled up inside until it burst out, and begin to evacuate quickly.
And you have been called to the cure of it, and you have medicated it for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Then you have paused over it because of certain causes of strong attraction, and taken out a bone from it, and passed some joints, and taken out another bone; and you have been too marvelous, as if there were no bones in the womb.
And then you have gathered that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
So you have understood the plague, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her womb with many thousand dispositions, and I have seen it in such a manner for a long time, corrected by removing a small piece of arm.
And you do not find it strange, but rather that there is science and help in what the artificial hand does on the wrist for administration of the cure.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is swollen:
This is the form of straightener in which the books are bound, to which binding two vertebrae are given at both ends of two feet. You should empower this vertebra to be more subtle than the straightener, and make it of ebony or of wood from boys.
And its width is of each wood that has two inches and a margin of about two inches that has one inch, and its length is one palm and half; and in the middle place of the two woods there are two adjustments of that same wood which were already fixed, of which the length is the measure of one palm and a little more, and its width is about two inches, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the womb of the mother so that it is swollen with those when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and more lightweight:
It is made of wood from ebony or boys, according to the similarity of forceps. You should empower the extremity of it with two additions thus, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and its width is two inches.
And when you want to open the womb, then you make the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging, opening what is between its thighs. And then you will have your hand on the instrument thus, making a grip according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the womb, until the midwife does it as you want.
The form of vertebrae which the ancients described:
Form of impeller in which the fetus is impelled:
Form of amissiad in which the large head is contained:
And it is assembled like a forceps which grips at the extremity, thus many times, and some viguadas are made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus many times, on which it grips thus as a grip of rescue in which it is inserted and contained. Form of small amissiad:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied by the species of that and prepared by the artisans, it is made lighter for their operation and also made more suitable for the quantity.
And you do not work with those instruments as if they were yours, because the necessity of those is inexcusable.
About the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the second stage is retained due to inflammation, then you command the patient to retain their urine, and at that time make them take a strong drink, and hold your hand over their mouth and nostrils, and if it is necessary beforehand, because it exists.
And then, you take a cloth and pierce it in the covering of a tube and place it on that herb which is near the mother's mouth, thus with calamint and rough and anet and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of them being submerged in water in the cloth, and then place that on the fire.
And then put a cane tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it until the vapor goes into the cavity of the womb.
And then make that strong drink, thus as we have said, and the second stage will be quickly evacuated.
If the Roman method does not succeed, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of other oils, and then insert it into the womb and scrub there the second stage, and when you have found it, take it out and extract it little by little. If it is stuck in the womb's cavity, then insert your hand again as we have recommended, and when you have found the second stage, extract it little by little so that the mother does not fall into vehement attraction. Before, make sure that the right and left sides are lubricated to facilitate.
And if the mother's womb is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with stiration and medication of the cloth with herbs.
If it is not evacuated with all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather take care that what has been expelled from the mother's womb lies in the space of the woman, and then crystallize it into an ointment and tetrapharmacon; for that will make it dissolve in a few days and will be evacuated.
When it is purged, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and in the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then take care that they are administered with sub-fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Some of the Ancients have already experienced sub-fumigation with narcissus and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument is that which the woman is sub-fumigated with, regarding the retention of menses and of the afterbirth.
It should be made of iron or of copper.
And it should be placed with the thin extremity in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And hold it until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then another one will follow.
On the treatment of the birth of an un-perforated infant.
Many infants are born like that and their births are not perforated, which have a thin and obstructed passage. Then take care that the midwife should perforate with a thin instrument that passage; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the ligament.
And then place it on that woolen cloth in wine and oil; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
If you fear that it is obstructed, then place a cane tube in the tube for many days, and wait until the infant will be able to expel.
And thus you will achieve obstruction of the birth by consolidation of plague or of abscess; then take care that this consolidation is incised, and then it should be cured with what we have said about the treatment and the poultice.
On the treatment of the fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are swollen and nodular, those which occur near the birth beforehand or in the space of one party.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that nodulation is ancient and corroded by the airy white humidity or subtle pyriduria, and some of these fistulas penetrate to the bottom.
And those penetrating ones are known through what has been expelled from them by the exit and by ventilation; and some of them receive the bad humor of exit, and it is clear that they have been expelled from those worms.
And some of those fistulas are implanted in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrations into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the coccyx.
And what is known as a penetrating fistula into the birth and not-penetrating, is that you put your finger thus endwise in the birth, and then insert a thin tentacle of iron or of copper in the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mostly if in that is turbulence, then insert into that subtle probe of lead or horsehair under the tongue so that you feel the probe or the hair on the tender spot.
And if you do not feel that at all and it does not proceed from any cause of indigestion or worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then abandon the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such an extent that the place in medicine is consolidated.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe reaches inside there if it is not turbulent into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that the patient has a purulent discharge at times; and that it does not benefit from that medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is troublesome and vain effort by doctors against which they are firm.
But in that which does not penetrate and is not chronic, health is ferried with iron and it is hoped according to what you have recommended, and this is what has already been and proceeded.
And it is that the patient lies between their own hands over the back of the chair and raises their legs towards them, their thighs being inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in the turbulent fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
And if the patient feels it around the neck, then uncover so that you insert the tender spot indicated in the neck.
And if you feel the probe already penetrated through the skin that is discovered, or something that feels between the tender spot and the skin or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not struggle with it, because it is not in that health, as we have said.
But emperor, I will describe some things that are healthy in some houses, bitter.
And of the medication for which you hope for youthful benefit in it, is that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the size of the fistula, as has been preceded, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated meats are like a feather's down.
And then heal that with calques enveloped in bandages until they can all be adjusted, and then heal that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the probe goes in, and does not penetrate into the tender spot which is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is barely a space of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula closes over the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that it is dried with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe is felt, and through the probe it is liberated and purged.
And then cleanse those fistulated meats which are assembled like a channel of feathers and do not remain with any cause.
But if it flows seven times that comes between you and your operation when you insert those meats, then the thousand that is and of the pus less grievous instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts good two habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted meats, and removal of the blood's excess moisture.
And then heal that with calques enveloped in bandages or in trussed causes until the place gets strength, and then heal the wound with hard flesh that engenders and consolidates.
And these medicines are those that are stipulated and excessive; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the tender spot in the anus and investigate with that.
And so if you feel the probe and between you and it is barely a space of skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation in that place except by way of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you acquire the conquest of it so that it is possible for you to insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not proceed with more drying so that you do not incite the contained liquid, and that you ascend upon the patient's assent of the will; and then heal it with what we have said because it strengthens the health; or elongate that barely a space and remove that pus which dries it until towards the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated meats which are in the drying towards the one who is percrustated; and then make an effort to restore all the wounds with drying, and if the pus above does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the affected part, and it will be less grievous for the patient. And the fistula is finished according to this method: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is on the sides of the cul (anus) around the surface of the body at the codena (likely means "cod" or "coccyx", the bony structure at the base of the spine) and on the margin of the cul, then take the perforated extremity, which is also like a needle for preparing the hollows according to this form:
you insert it into that vein enveloped by five veins or around those; and then you insert the thread into the fistula until it reaches the cavity of the hernia.
Perhaps it penetrates to the margin of the anus properly between the teeth, then you extract the vein from that tube also so that you insert the finger into the anus; and you extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and strain each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when it penetrates more into the flesh, strain until those fleshes are penetrated which are between the two extremities of the vein and fall.
And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and cured.
Perhaps the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not so much on the forefinger, because it is not for you to do that so that it doesn't incise the ligament; and then make it enter until it is healed.
The form of the spinal spatula is such that it is suited for the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that it does not incise what is not necessary, like sometimes.
About the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two methods, because either they come out between the anus resembling a Carbuncle, or those are like a cluster of raspberries. And some of them are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and in their extremities.
Perhaps those that are outside the anus are according to the measurements of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous flux, and it is according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is between the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to exert themselves until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take them with your fingers or hold them with your nail, and then you cut them at their roots.
Perhaps if the nails do not hold them due to their humidity and softening of those, then take them with a rough cloth or with a knife or with a woolen thread, and extract them with the fingers, and then cut them and powder over them with certain hot powders, so that they are as in the place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal them with another cure until they are cured.
And if the anus does not obey the exit, then you anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a little bitter ingredient, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and it obeys to the exit more easily when the patient exerts themselves.
Perhaps if the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your finger, or that you take them with a nail, and cut them, and then heal them with what we have said until they are cured.
And he who makes an incision, should administer the suturing of them according to this method: take a thread enveloped and insert it into a needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above-mentioned parts, and make it penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and enfold the two extremities of the thread around the above-mentioned part below the needle, and thus latitudinally; and strain the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then tie the thread and extract the needle.
And make it all, and leave one of those and do not touch it, so that the superfleuity of the blood flows from that.
And then pause on the anus, wrapped in olive oil or cerate; and pause that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave it until it falls; and when it is fallen, heal them with an ointment or another cure until they are healthy.
And since they are antiquated and do not hold in that medicine, then it is necessary to remove them with the point of the spatula or with your finger until they are made humid and held back from those ulcers above, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
When you have set aside those raging humors that violently enter and disturb the primary veins, and then take care to heal them so they are healthy.
You will know that it is gout, because it is a key, and it is not so unless you notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is done throughout the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends for those who have this affliction.
And then it happens that the gout is situated in the circuit of the key, and it has taken hold with its claws or with a hook, and it has rooted itself in its reason; and then take care to heal it.
And if you want, cauterize the secondary pain that is located in the following chapter.
More of a true aposteme is a small, rounded, blistered, rough prominence on the surface of the body, and many veins come together in the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is that you extend and insert it, or that you stretch it with a file or a hair within so it falls out. And if you want, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
More of a true anthill is a small, rough or blistered prominence on the surface of the body, which appears like a nut in the forearm, and when it touches that, it is felt like the bite of an ant, and it is done around the body.
And the treatment of it is that you take a tube of peacock's feather or of vulture's feather, and it is strong, and place that over the anthill until it contains the circle of the tube in the parts of the body; and then revolve your hand around the tube so that you insert what is in the circuit of the anthill, and place that on the skin of the flesh, and eradicate the anthill from its root.
And if you want, do it with a tube of iron or of steel according to this form:
The part below the tube is to be subtle, imperforated (so it does not pass through), enveloped in such a way that above it the grasp of it is released and the revolution of it.
And if you want to cauterize the anthill according to what has been said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter of cauterizing.
The form of the instruments that are administered to give crystallization.
Some veins are crystallized with silver or gold or iron fondue or molten; and some veins are done with those small and large instruments according to those which are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose intestines are fragile or delicate, the crystallizations of those are small.
The form of large and small crystallization:
The head of the tube of it below which is tied the bag is wide according to this manner; and it is at the distance where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the intestine, is imperforated (so it does not open) much like a lion, subtly; and on one side of its flank there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the greatness of the roots and thus a small one is bigger.
And it is the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and the root of it is a palm.
And it is perforated for many channels thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the channels is large enough to hold the said.
And then insert into those channels a strong file of crude iron which is of diverse files, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed in it, it is stretched on the head of the crystallizer between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then crystallize in each channel: More, the quality of crystallizing in that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient is resupinated on his back, and raises his legs up and places one body part over which there are holes or a window; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or album of water lily or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the intestine to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it twice and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crystallizer; and then remove the crystallizer and the patient raises his legs up to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that out of the sediment, it holds as much as it can; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more direct in its juvenile stage.
If you crystallize that solution in the afflicted areas of abdominal swelling and his symptoms, then you apply the cautery inward so that it may be healthy.
And if there are bloody abscesses or postules on the back, then the crystallizer is subtle and refined, among the crystallizers that children are accustomed to being treated with.
About the treatment of wounds.
You have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that which is convenient to the book, and you have thus said the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to what and how they are made, and according to the place on which they occur.
And the causes why many wounds are made thus are from a blow of stone, or incision of a space or of a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a dart, or similar to those of many causes.
Meanwhile, the wounds that are on the parts of the body are thus as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the abdomen, or the thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
And you are recommending the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that rationalization and rule about the other wounds.
And you begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection of the compounds will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple head wound occurs and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's from a blow of stone or similar, and you have already treated the coding so much alone and it's a great wound and you fear about that bad abscess having a cautious swelling, then you should quickly apply the cephalic fleubotomia, and don't delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there's no prohibitive cause for fleubotomia, especially if the blood is exhausted from the wound, which is few.
And it's the fleubotomia of the contrary of the affected part; and beware of the bad abscess of replication and of veiled and thick veins.
Meanwhile, if from the minimization prohibited some cause, then it is diminished of the vein and does not approach neither flesh nor vein.
And pause on the wound, if it occurs with cautious abscess, where it infuses in oil of rose or in wine on which it is stippled.
Meanwhile, if it is certain of cautious abscess, then pause on the wound, if it is recently with healthy blood and the air has not changed that powder which you recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the external unguents until it is healed.
Meanwhile, if the wound is great or is from incision of a space and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust those with suture according to what you recommend about the suture of them.
Meanwhile, if the wound is already discovered of bone and flesh, and it's not retained except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply curative treatment to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the coding, and command the bad abscess to be purged of veins in which there is gruesomeness: capsules and forming cysts and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if you find putrefaction in the coding and it doesn't adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and apply curative treatment to it.
Meanwhile, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which healthy blood may flow, and it's not abscessed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised, then you incise that with a spatula, or ligate that; and if necessary, you provoke that what we have said does not conflict, then you cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way you powder over those with that powder, because consolidated in that moment when the air changes them.
And the preparation of the powder is this: take oil of rose one part, of dragon's blood two parts, of burnt crust three non-extinct parts; let it be thoroughly trituated and crumbled, and of that let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it is on that adhering surface, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
And apply strenghtening to that beneath with pustules and let it alone, and don't remove it while it is thus, because it's not abscessed, since it's not eradicated from the medicine until it is healed.
And some wounds make that sole scar, when there is no presence of rose and dragon's blood.
And you do this same operation on the great wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are strengthened, and so recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not convenient to stay in the position of this powder, but rather cure those limbs that I have told you about, by placing them on the cushions of the bed or on the flour of the ordered arrangement and water and honey are entered within so that they get purified; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Perhaps you have fallen into a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract what you have done badly.
And I will teach you the cure for fractures of the head in that which is coming.
About the sores of the neck.
Perhaps the sore has fallen on the neck, then it is not in the difference of medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Perhaps the nerve of the neck is constricted or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the genus but rather to be avoided cure of that which makes vehement stipulation, thus as ziniar and zegi that it appears like vetriol and resembles their quartet no more than the nerves and contradicts that. And do not stop on the sore for any cause of total friability, because the substance of the nerves is friable and its continuation is in the brain, which is the worst of all the members.
And if it is what is cured by gentle medicines, thus as it is caused by washing with warm water, any infusion of oil rose or not-rose, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other minor pains are diminished according to this manner, and they lose human ills.
Perhaps the sore is great, then administer stitching, or sew up its lips, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
Perhaps the sore is deep or has fallen into the worst part of the body, then pierce it in the place where it is most precarious.
Perhaps in the sore an artery is constricted and a flow of blood has been obtained, then separate or dry it, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke it to that.
Perhaps you have inserted the vertebrae of the throat or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the codena with stitching over the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it with a decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with ills in which there is stipulation and excitement until it is healed.
Perhaps the sore has formed an abscess in the bone, then pierce it, and then if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that you can from them; and what you cannot remove, leave it until the sore is purified, and let it be separated and the edge of the bone be alleviated.
And if the sore is recent, then powder over that powder which I have recommended to you. Perhaps in the sore there is made a fistula, then cure it with water of which the remembrance will come to you in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of the lancet or of the collar, and sometimes of its depth, then consider perhaps that the sore has been visited when the patient was ill; then you will know that the sore is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the sore is recent with seven bloods, then you stop in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and alleviates the patient, perhaps pause in it an attractive ill, and dissolve those two veins a day.
And if the ill is not present to you, then pause in the orifice of the sore as much as possible so that it sucks what is of the humidity; and make that the patient sleeps on the sore so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
Perhaps if the sore has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart or stricture of wings, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the sore is saved; and then cure it with calves and the other cure until it is healed.
Perhaps if the healing of it is excessive, and already all time has been overcome, then you will know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
And if the sore is from constriction of a splint or collar, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Perhaps if it has formed an abscess in the bone, and then you constrict its edges, then twist the sore and gather to extract those edges, if they are separated. More if they are not separated, then read the entre that can be empowered by the plague, which their extraction from it is alleviated.
And of the other accidental afflictions in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
Of the ailments of the belly.
The indisposition that occurs in the belly is great, or small, or moderate.
And the small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of theirs to their own place at once, because it becomes engrossed and it is made difficult by the instrument of it.
And thus the moderate disruption is better, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And it is known that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that concur in sutures of the other ailments of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other ailments, but especially they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one's exposition and declaration.
So it is said that when the ailment is small and some cause of the intestine is for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is come to inflammation through the coldness of the air.
And so when it is thus, then you should scaldfy it in this way that you submerge a sponge hot with humid drap in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embroques on that intestine within, until the inflammation is resolved.
And some evacuated make it seen in which has stipulated, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And so when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should humidify the intestine with water in which is cooked altaea and malvas, because for that it is alleviated the instrument of it with few causes.
But if the instrument of it is excused from this cure, then you should divide the disruption with a small instrument in which are inserted emollients.
And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there is no occupation to sectionalize necessarily and to fail.
Of the instrument, thus you see its form:
One part of the sharp-pointed stick, and the other part not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it is not in the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse by a little.
And so when the ailment is amplified and it is outside the intestine, then you should that its reduction be according to the form of the natural, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better is.
But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus that their head is higher; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you pause the head of it and the feet thus that the parts below are higher.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your intention and consideration for a time in this way so that the part in which is the ailment is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer it in the great ailments and in the moderate ailments.
And in the small ailments, pause that which is to your preparation, and thus make that the minister be among your most prepared, who has the total disruption at his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus discover from that to he who knows the suture of some cause to another.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the ailment; and thus release the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, at the two extremities of the ciphac that is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the code and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so make four orders.
And thus strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some evacuated from two parts at once, and thus add the two lips to the ailment for decent addition; and thus release the grossness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and thus tie it with faith as if it were the primary needle; and do not cease to do so if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the ailment.
And the fine needles are inserted between the grooved and subtle areas, because the fine needles subtly pierce the flesh; and the coarse ones have difficulty entering the codeina, and thus it is seen that the fine ones are in subtlety and coarseness.
It is not seen that the needle is fixed in both extremes of the codeina propounded against it, so that the flesh is not subtly pierced and that the wound closes before its consolidation.
And they are not prolonged with a suture so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then the extremes of the needles are inserted so that they do not let the malaute deviate from its usual dormier; and poultices expanded with a whole part are placed over the suture, which hold the extremes of the needles; and thus it is seen that the wound has already consolidated.
And in these species of suture with needles, it is customary to apply them conveniently in small wounds, because they have need of a suture with one needle or two around those.
The second suture is communal: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremes, of the codeina and two extremes of the ciphac, in one way, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and coarseness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremes, return the needle from that same part of which it began, so that the thread retracts and draws out the most subtle part of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture with a drawstring in which the threads are strengthened.
And stop between each suture the quantity of the grossness of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And in this suture, I have often cured the wound that was inflicted on a man in his left belly, which had been wounded with a knife, and it was a disruption of the major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the intestine in the middle location, and it was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have often reduced that swelling that the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around that time, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I saw him for many years, and it is converted into his own dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healthy; and by a miracle, it happened, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment nor any medicine was of use, but rather I placed a poultice on the wound for many days and nights, and I washed assiduously with honey water until he was healthy.
Moreover, I will describe two special species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the codeina, and you insert the needle from the forepart to the hindpart.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the codeina and in that same place it is straightened according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and thus the extreme of the ciphac is where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the hindpart to the forepart in the other extreme of the finger.
And thus when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extreme of the finger from the forepart to the hindpart; and thus the extreme of the ciphac is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate from the hindpart to the forepart in the other extreme.
And make it penetrate in that your penetration is made in which you make it penetrate into the ciphac in the extreme of the mirror, which is in the part of it within, until all that penetrates.
And then it begins from this same coast and sews that which is in the extreme of the ciphac in another layer, and extracts the needle from the codeina that penetrated, and then returns it to that codeina and thus the extreme of the ciphac is on the other side in this extreme of the mirror; and extracts it from the codeina that is part of it.
And make it one way and another, and make it one way then another way until you collect all that is fore according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you collect a suture of pellicies in which you collect the skins, thus that you collect the ciphac one way from the part of the extreme of the codeina, and that you leave another way until it is completed.
Moreover, the second species of proper suture that Gualia says is of sermo, and it is recommended for him and by him, it is that you collect according to similarity in which you apply medicinal collections that collect, thus that they add all part to its comparable part conveniently by nature; and they apply the extreme of another to the extreme of the mirror to another extreme, and this is done according to what I recommend to you.
When you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own discretion, and make it penetrate to the inner part of the foreskin, and let the two extremities of the scaphoid bone; then return the needle and make it penetrate from the foreskin to the inner part of the two extremities of the scaphoid bone.
And then return those needles, and make them penetrate some inner parts of the foreskin into the outer part in two extremities of the mirror on the opposite side that is in the contrary latitude.
And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned the remedy.
This is the serum of Wales
And the dissected abdomen is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce them into these holes, and begin with the introduction of a needle from that which belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which close the wounds together.
And you know that when disruption is in a middle place of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than of other places of the abdomen.
The judgment of medicine for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you recently contracted the plague with bad blood, before the air altered that, and reduced the intestine and constricted it decently, then paused over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that dissected abdomen which holds the abscesses, so they are present within to make hard and dense flesh, and thus consolidate scaphoid bone and mirror; and then cure it in this way as is the cure of other plagues until it is healthy.
But if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that at least, because it begins to take hold quickly, much better, and exchanges those two vegetables a day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositional ways when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will communicate to the principal members, then place under the woolen cloth of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and pause it in the circle of places that are between the veins and joints.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestinal veins, because many vegetables have been given to you, then crystallize that in six stipatic black points, and majorly if the pus is generated in the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
And you know that which is of the large intestine is of purer blood, healthier than that which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gégenu" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the intestines decently.
But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then strengthen that with a thread over the place that is denigrated of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then inscribe that which is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the part below the plague foro it, so that over you be alleviated the attraction of it from the falling of the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remedy for plagues when they settle in the intestine.
When disruption settles in the intestine and is petty, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the upper abdomen with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its governance and ventilation.
Then you understand the cure of it already, that it was not confused in its healing, but rather you continue to subtily treat it until it is healthy and the place is consolidated.
And you have seen that the place is already consolidated, then proceed over the patient who suffers from bad accidents in the upper abdomen; and do not undertake anything for that bad accident and remain in their many dispositional ways mangling and venting, and then enter into a bath and exercise themselves in their own words.
And already I have experimented with many experiments that when plague settles in the intestine, and is petty, then place it according to this manner: take granulated caps; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a granule of those which has an open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; thus when you take hold of them and strengthen their mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And you should pause another remedy for the first attack, and do not stop until you have made another remedy according to the quantity of all the plague.
And you should return that one and constrict the plague; and remove those annexed capsules from the intestine so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not aggravate the patient with unnecessary movement.
It is possible that the intestine is lightly attached to the subtle fiber which is made from the intestine of annexed beasts, since it is more in a corner; and it is that you take the extremity of these fibers of the intestine, and it is not very decayed, and you attach the extremity of it to the fiber of the same, enveloped, and you insert that fiber into corners and constrict it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of stitching with remedies is not based on anything but trust and hope.
But if the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then there is no remedy but subtlety, and it is not a total healing of all.
About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that all plague and aposteme when they become inflamed and old, it is an ulcer, and if not consolidated and healed for a long time and not abscessed, then, in whatever member it may be, it is universally called fistula and we call that abyss.
And fistula, according to truth, is a hardened, tough, white node, in which there is no pain and which is constricted thus as it is constricted by the pain of a bird's beak; and for this reason it is named a painful ulcer, that is, pain.
And it is in an ulcer of moist humors, which heals slowly; and for this reason the moisture is abscessed in certain hours. And some of these moistened humors are thick, and they are few, and they are coarse, and they are subtle.
You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
And it is suitable that you know how to make a cure for fistula, which is done through surgical operation with hand.
And you know that fistula affects all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the spinal vertebrae, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those it is that which gives proximity to the principal member and resemblance.
And therefore among those fistulas which are according to this manner are of the maladies of difficult healing, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with that is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas some depth of which does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its cure, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a tent of iron or of steel, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire that with hand.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a subtle leaden probe, because lead in the elevation of the body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify anything about it with a probe.
Then crystallize the horrible things through their horrible things, because the moisture for which you crystallize that goes away from the other horrible things and corrects them.
And you should inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the constricting of the long-distant fistula or propinquous, or it is a fistula in which there are many horrible things and this is about all your strength, in your entrance into the malady, in which you enter into the malady, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the place, and resemblance of the signs and of the accidental causes to the aposteme.
When you have stood over all those causes in a fixed position, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the apparent fistula is near or far from the joint, of nerve, of artery, of vein, or of one of the places which you have pointed out.
Then you touch the fistula according to what is said about its narration, and observe if it is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and if it was born in the origin of the flesh, or of the heel and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healthy.
Perhaps the fistula is of deep profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then you should insert that into the surrounding area as much as possible, and then Mondify all its corrupted flesh; and then administer some enveloped acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended in iron.
And do that some of those sharp medicines enter so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
Perhaps if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Perhaps the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify that, then you should inquire into it and touch it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member, thus as we have said.
Perhaps the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that within so that the corruption is held completely; and then cure it with what encircles it within, so that it may be sanctified.
And if it is not healthy and throws out the arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondly and exquisitely the reason of it and the mundification of it with the last strong fortitude, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you should not try to generate anything there but only leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should extract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those that do not leave any cause in your strength.
Perhaps if you have made opposition to any cause of the humors, and in their insertion there is no fear nor error, then you should insert those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Perhaps if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the plague that touches the plague there, and leaves it within so that it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the plague so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inserted in your operation is constrained.
However, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone situated above the three olive oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian anguished vertebrae, because when they purify those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their separation, and of those attracted is alleviated.
Perhaps it is a large bone thus as the bone of the chamber or of the thigh or similar to those, and what of it is corrupted is the face of it so alone, then root out that with resolution so alone in the end so that the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the plague.
Perhaps what of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and totally insert into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure it so that it may be consolidated.
And I recommend to you what has been tried at home on his thigh so that you pause there and exemplify and adjust over your operation.
A young man of about thirty years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the affected parts it is clear that the matter is concerning the body within so that the matter has pervaded into the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess in a great abscess, and I do not find any extrinsic cause.
And then I extended the time in that error of the doctors within so that the abscess was hidden, and I gathered the putrid matters, and its cure was paused until the thigh was fistulized, and it was done in the rotten origins which all had gotten purulence and the humors of the body.
And then I treated many doctors around for two years, and I did not find any knowledge in those arts except in the one which was called.
And behold the chest of that man and the materials that flow from it, those orifices for a large body; and already the body of that man was totally stabozited and the color of it was citrine.
Then I will introduce the probe into one of those orifices and pass the probe to the bone.
And then I will thoroughly examine all the orifices and try to penetrate to their origin in all parts of the chest.
And then I will dissect and incise over one of those orifices until I discover a part of the bone, and I will scrape out that corrupted matter, and it was already corroded and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the chest until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I will syringe out what was discovered by me and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And I will verify that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had extracted and syringed out, and I had already drained it.
And then I will pause the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then I will iterate and uncover the bone again according to the primary discovery, and I will continue to scrape out corruption in the bone.
And I will syringe out what appears to be that corruption, and then I will perform forcefully the cure of it and the restoration, but it is not restored.
And then I discovered about the other side and did not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extract was from its marrow, and then I will restore it with medicines, and it is consolidated quickly and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens to total hours for superfluous evacuation of bad syncopes.
And thus it is healed entirely, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in its own body and returned its virtue to it; and it is converted into its own dispositions and did not make any contrariness in walking nor harm in any cause.
Moreover, if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already extracted, then you will see that you must do this according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend itself into its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then tie it over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not lead the flesh.
And pause just below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw so that it does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is seen that the sawing is over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sentiment, and it forces the sawing of the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts totally; and then pause just below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And the sawing is according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its generation.
And if the corruption is in the thickness of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, I see that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp it, and examine it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and in case it can be rectified for you, when it does not make any contrariness or nervousness.
And you know what instruments are needed to incise these bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; so that I see that you prepare all kinds of operations and convenient instruments for that operation.
And you know that this operation means to you about the kind of instrument which you need; when I am great study and long and knowledgeable of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, because then you have them for yourself, so that you can measure what is convenient for the instruments in all maladies.
And you have formed in the end of this chapter the list of instruments that you will need, which are simple and which are prohibited, which you will experience on others. Form of a saw:
Form of another saw: (Note: It seems like the text is listing different types of instruments or tools, and this line is describing another type of saw)
Form of a large saw:
Form of a radius: The head of this radius is according to the form of a star-shaped nail head, and its points are according to the form of the pointed stilfeggio ( stilfeggio likely means stilhetto or stiletto, a type of pointed instrument).
And it is not suitable unless you confide in that instrument to scrub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another saw decently made: it is made with an arc of its handle curved and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its boys (possibly meaning "parts" or "components") are decently made. Form of it:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small rasp resembling a file:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a radius, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a radius that is suitable for the ratio of those that are perforated into the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and of sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered that all the causes we have said about rasps and incisors and saws.
About incising extremities and the sawing of bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with cures of medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption becomes so great that it devours the member which does not perceive any cause, then it is necessary to incise that member until the bone where the corruption resides, so that the evil may pass away through death or malice, which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that which happens to him, is that the member becomes black until it is understood that fire has already consumed it, or it is weakened near the blackness until the weakness reaches the bone inside that member and takes hold of the whole body; and thus you will know the incision of that.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption due to venomous percussion from certain causes, such as from a maritime scorpion or a viper or a rhutella and similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you incise at the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it worsens, then you incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause or treatment is to quantity the virtue.
And similarly it happens with the foot when corruption worsens in the toes of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. Moreover if it spreads into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already spread over the ankle, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch one ligament at the part where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend one minister (assistant) with one ligament to the parts below, and extend another minister with a ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in a spaced-out manner until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
And it is necessary to place a cloth of linen over all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and cauterized with caution.
Moreover if there is a flow of blood when operating, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place above it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
And then apply a clean dressing to the affected limb in a convenient way, and take care that the wound is healed.
You should recommend to him that he should avoid going out in the cold foot, this kind of accident which you have and recommended, which is quite common for the black bile in the cold foot to be assembled into combustion of fire.
And that corrupting accident occurs primarily in the cold foot inside, so that it tends to affect the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself for such pus as comes out of the limb with great vehemence, which attracts more pain and discomfort, and the incision is made on that foot inside the joint, and it heals by fire.
A long time ago, that corrupting accident occurred in the hand of the mother of mine.
And then it came to me, and I felt forced to report that superfluity above the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and it does not remove the superfluity, and begins to go into the other foot inside, until it begins in the hand.
And the doctor told me to incise his hand, and you do not want to do that which appears above the repercussion of that superfluity, and more than anything fear the incision of his mortal hand, because the virtue of the patient was on the verge of collapse.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his own land and it happened to me that the man prepared and incised his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding that which is spoken of in this illness, and that it may be significant for what is signified and according to which it is worked.
About the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is drained from the body, and one finds the place where it was, as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above the abscess as a subtle drapery, and it does not reach the derriere corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into a certain member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
And the cure of it is that one incises the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and especially when it is subtle and made into a drapery, and one makes sure that it does not adhere to the place for its corruption.
However, if you fear that the cord will adhere and that the corruption has not been conquered by previous consequence, and in the cord it has passed from one side to the other, then you cure him with a clusters.
And that is what you consider about the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm which you have is of fetid odor, then you cleanse him with Egyptian medicine made of oil and wine and juniper, and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine is roasted and penetrates to a specific place of honey.
And then you take of him what is necessary and dissolves the honey in water; and you cleanse him with that in the sinus, and strengthen his orifice, and leave the medicine in him for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that honey with precision; and do so for many days until the sinus is purified and the pus is removed.
And some vegetables are cleansed with water of ash, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitex, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse him with it until you confirm that the sinus is thus cleared.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then cleanse him with honey and water and a mixture of juniper, and cleanse him with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey that it purifies and cleanses, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is superfluity of stickiness and dryness.
And when you do that to some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already cleared, then cleanse him with water that makes the flesh grow in him.
And it is that you take of dyaphonic unguent and dissolve it in oil of rose and wine stipated; or that you cleanse him with some medicines and other unguents which have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is strait in which the cannula of the cleansing cannot be received, then you amplify it little by little, and pause in the warm water wrapped in Egyptian unguent or basilicon unguent until it is amplified.
It seems that the text is describing a medical procedure. Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
"And if the orifice of that which flows through the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lower place where it is in the pus, because when the arm is constricted at the joint's curvature, the flesh will be engendered in it."
"And if it is not possible for you to dry the joint from the surrounding pus, then you will prepare the member with preparation for which the arm flows more easily, according to your own judgment and without any retention of the cause of the arm."
"Moreover, that which is on the orifice of the joint, which remains in place for a whole hour, so that it becomes adjusted to the arm's own." "And so that you know if that which flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested."
"And thus you should consider the place of that joint, if the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess."
"And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is grafted onto the orifice of the joint already adheres, or it takes proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third or fourth day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the dressing."
"Moreover, if the joint takes a little space, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it will take place, because some homes are in those which generate slow flesh in those plague wounds, and of those which are done contrary to them."
"And if the joint takes many days to digest an indigested arm, then you know that the joint does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the joint is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus with a dyafinicon dressing, when it is in an adjusted superfluous addition of zeal."
"And the last thing is that which is cured, it is that you take from the dyafinicon dressing and dissolve it in rose oil, and it is on the vojat vi antic equal in its substance, and you comfort with that, and use it."
"And now it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, dyafinicon dressing, but rather it is contained within so that it is gross, and use it; or take myrrh and aloen and grind everything into powder over the honey which is on the focus, and place it above the cloth and strengthen it above the joint; and place that above the honey which has been contained within so that it is gross, and powder above the cloth and strengthen it."
"And some vegetables are administered in the long aristology and root of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind those and powder above the honey which has been recommended; and use it."
"And if the joint is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the purulence of it, and now it has inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistular cure, thus as has been said above."
"Of the cure of panniculus and worn-out nails and incised digits added to the section."
"Panniculus is an abscess which grows under the nail of the finger or toe, and it grows in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less precised, or it is cauterized with a hot abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws out arm into corroding the root of the nail, and it corrupts all that, and it pervades its corruption to the bone within which it is in foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color is made dark."
"And so when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you incise all the superfluous flesh that remains from the nail and cauterize the plague properly, because cauterizing much is not beneficial thus."
If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to comprehend the flesh at the divided parts, and start to pierce and lance that, then it's clear that you should pause subtly beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and impel it inwardly into that flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines burning inward so that it may be totally removed; and then cure that which has been engorged so that it may be healthy.
If the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it's clear that you should incise into the bone and extract it, because at no time is it healthy when the bone is corrupted.
And if the corrosion and corruption have gone into the finger, then you incise into it in one of the nails according to what is prescribed for its remedy, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
If the nail has received a concussion or injury, and has received intense pain, then it's clear that you should apply flebotomy to the affected part, and then cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument above the transverse section below, and be careful that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the intense pain of the affected part, and cause an excessive growth of superfluous flesh at the site; and then cure that place so that it ceases to hurt.
But the adjusted finger, which is born in the hands of many men, is entirely fleshy, and entirely flesh in the bones, or entirely flesh in the nail.
And some of them are born in the roots of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in the nodes of the fingers does not become bad, and this which is born in the joints is entirely swollen.
And of those that are fleshy growths, the cutting is easier, and it is that you should incise into their roots with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
But in that which is born on the fingers with the nodes, it's clear that you should incise at the beginning of the flesh to make a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
But consolidation is that which accelerates the fingers between the worn-out joints or by birth of the man who has them thus, or for consolidation of plague or for combustion of fire, or for semblance; therefore it's clear that you should cut into that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between the flaps of the swollen veins in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them from each other, or pause between them with a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly if consolidation accelerates in the fingers on the palm, then you cut into that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and they are grossly swollen with superfluous melancholic fluids which come from the members of the body, and the greatest incident of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and porters.
Therefore it's clear that you should administer purification of the body from black bile in some worn-out veins with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But the cure of their iron ferrum is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood should be attracted, and the other method is that the vein should be elevated and all of it should be extracted.
The cutting of it is according to this method: inject at the beginning of the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, and then strengthen the affected leg at the superior part of the thigh up to the knee, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood at the right time above the knee, and below, until the quantity that you want is extracted, and which tolerates the virtue of the affected part.
And then leave it, and command him to abstain from the food that generates black bile.
And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and there is no improvement in the affected part.
But the elevation of them is according to this method: you who raise the affected leg, if there are many pels in it, and then put it in a bath and inject the leg with warm water until it becomes enriched and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised with strong exercise, even if a bath is not present, until the member is scaled.
And then you should section the vein in the right direction to cut into the loin or in the back of the patient's body, or in the lower part of their thigh.
And then you should uncover the vein at an inch and scarify the entire vein within so that it appears to sensation, and it is from their perception that sometimes that rough decline turns to blackness.
And then you remove from the vein at times that white discharge which seems like a cord.
And then you put beneath that the rod inside so it is elevated and extracted from the vein, and suspend it in an inch above the lion.
And then you should section another section next to that section for three fingers, and then scarify the vein of the partition below the vein so it appears.
And then you elevate it and insert it in the back section of their thigh, and then extract it and elevate it so it is poured out through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And make it so that you extract it from the section that is most above or most outer of all the sections, until everything is poured out; and then insert it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and extract it, or introduce beneath the rod and rotate your hand on all sides until it is grasped. And beware that it is not inserted; for if it is broken, it is made difficult for you to elevate that member and it comes upon the patient for that injury.
And when all the humors have been evacuated, then pause over the place of the open wound with a mixture of oil and rose water and non-rose water, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is contracted having twisted to that which is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then be aware that you should bend over that entire twisting of theirs and the places of their envelopment, and then suspend it in an inch until it elevates entirely.
And beware that you do not insert the section into the vein and that it does not harm that, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and keep your prudence in that.
Method of inserting the section where life is divided:
It is not to be inserted thus with the inches nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility of the loin, for if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; but instead it is in the superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just as in the land of the Arabs and in the lands of India, which are dry and arid with little fertility, and in which there are no herbs nor trees.
And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its gestation is of putrefaction that you see beneath the vein, just as venomous reptiles and worms and scorpions are generated between the vein and the flesh.
And the signal of the suspicion of its advent is from this vein that causes inflammation violently in the leg; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering which seems to resemble a plant's root.
And then it appears from there to the extremity, then you should wrap around that one piece of lead whose weight is that of a dram, inside two drams, and now take away that and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
And so many times as the juices of its certain cause are in the parts beforehand, envelop it in lead and remove that. And if the member is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and envelop the remaining; and do not insert that by root until it is entirely evacuated, for if you insert that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes aposteme and putrefaction in the place and bad ulceration.
For you should be careful that it is treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is entirely evacuated from the back of it and none of its cause remains in the body.
And from this vein it is said that some men are in their longitude of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have found one who reached 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the rod into the channel of it and perforate that in the long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure that by the cure of apostemes.
And this vein has many times moved to the foot, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its foot orrificis, and is said to be from some orrifici ram.
And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and I will show you what has been said above.
About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called cow's disease.
This disease is named in some lands as cow's disease because many moist vapors go out from the flesh and it is a few worms that are born between the gut and the flesh, and they spread throughout the whole body, weakening and destroying the joints, and it shows its effects by dissolving the gut and going outward.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors, thus accumulating worms and serpents and roundworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, it pierces the veil, then strongly breaks down the veil within it, and many moist vapors go out.
And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not proceed unless you have the suitable walking and application of it to the sentiment, and then you will understand what is above it and what is below it in liaison and strong constriction, and thus you will dry over it and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not come out, then you apply a cautery iron to the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the area as we have said.
Perhaps it has penetrated to the head near the veil, then you will strongly hold onto the eyebrows with a strong structure, and thus you will dry over it, and extract it; and you know that the disease is of mondification of the whole body through medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of frequent generations of putrefaction.
About the section on naive disease of the nave (or "naval" disease).
This disease is named in our land as nave's disease, and it is pain that goes into certain members, and thus it spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you. You were called to a sick woman in a town, and you discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after being massaged for an hour, you saw that inflammation go away thus as it was going down to this, but rather more lightly because it seemed to be porous, thus if it were silver you would see how it corrodes from place to place.
And then I put myself in the pain of that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and thus I stayed for an hour.
And thus I ran to the other body part until I reached the other arm.
And thus I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what you saw; and it was too marvellous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And I had already seen that in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many things which cause pain to be permuted from member to member. But I do not see it in the veins thus as in the woman.
And I did not think it was thus except that it is because the woman was of vile nature, with dry body and discovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permutated windiness.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-action in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with mixed veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the vein thus as we have said, then hold strongly onto it and let it be lightly treated and dried over it until that constricted windiness is expelled, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not find it in your own veins, then you cure it with evacuation of the body and that which expels windiness, and you eliminate those foul pills and pills of serpent and similar things.
About the extraction of arrowheads.
Arrowheads are diversified according to the species, and according to the places in the body where they fall, because their diversity is that of those which have large points, and small ones, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those which have three angles, and of those which have tongues; and of those which have astellas (a type of arrowhead).
Of the signs of service are when it is seen in the sagittal section, and it crosses the bones, and it is situated on the cisterna, which is above the brain, because it accumulates vehemently in the soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the wheels, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and perplexity of understanding and vomit of cholera, and the voice is absent and is destroyed the vote, and it is situated on the place of the plague humid white similar to a pulse, and yes of it similar to being affected by the flesh.
And so if you appear to have these signs, then you abstain from the treatment and extraction of the sagittal section, if it is not outside.
The signs of the sagittal section when it is seen in the heart, so that it is close to the left breast, and I feel that it is fixed due to a hard cause, and it is not a fleeting cause; and the voice has movement similar to a pulse, and it corrodes with black gangrene, and it dries out that coldness of the extremities, and it freezes the flesh, and it syncopates; and so you know that death descends upon all who have it.
And the signs when the sagittal section has affected the lung, so it is filled with bloody spumous phlegm of the plague, and the veins that are near the colon become apostematous, and the color of the patient's skin is altered, and they exhale a great amount of spirit, and demand strong attraction of fresh air.
And if you see the sagittal section in the wrapping that is on the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes great vehement pain and breathing difficulty, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if you see the sagittal section in the stomach, then it is a sign of plague with some kind of indigestion.
And if you see the sagittal section in the belly, and it is fixed in it, it is a sign of some kind of plague ulcer, or the web, or hernia that is dislocated, and there is no hope in the treatment of extracting the sagittal section.
And if the sagittal section is seen in the bladder, and it is obstructing urine, and it processes some cause to the previous parts, and then there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
The other members also, such as the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the joints, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similarities to the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the sagittal section does not obstruct a vein or artery and is not a venomous sagittal section.
And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these sagittal sections, so that they signify for you about the treatment tied to them.
This is the cause, because in one case the sagittal section falls into the lacrimal duct of the eye, and I extract it from one part to another, leaving the gray matter of the aurelia, and it is healthy, and does not accumulate in the eye's humor.
And I extract another sagittal section from a Jew who had it in his gray matter of the eye, behind the eyelid, and the sagittal section was hidden and not conquered by that except for a small extremity that adhered to the eye's foundation, and it was a great sagittal section of the sharp sagittal sections of the Turks, like a fierce lion in which there were no aurelia.
And the Jew is healthy, and it does not happen to the eye's humor bad accident.
And I extracted another sagittal section from a Christian who had it in the gullet, and it was an Arabic sagittal section, and it is that which has aurelia; and then I incised above that between two guides, and it was submerged in the gullet of his; and then I subtly lifted it, and I extracted it, and the Christian is healthy.
And I extracted another sagittal section from a man who had it in his belly, and I thought that he would die from that; and then, since thirty days passed and it did not move on account of any of its dispositions, I incised above the sagittal section and engaged with it, and he is healthy, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw a man in whom a sagittal section fell into his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and since he did not get up for seven years, I extracted the sagittal section from the roots of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom a sagittal section fell into her belly, and the plague is consolidated inside her, and it does not move according to its dispositions in reality, and the woman does not obstruct any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom a sagittal section fell into his face and the plague is consolidated, and it breaks the sagittal section, not obstructing much pain, and many similarities to these.
And I extracted the sagittal section of the man of the princes of the king who had it in his nose's middle place and it had declined to the right part a little, and the whole sagittal section was hidden.
And you were called to cure it by applying the remedy of the sage within three days.
And then you attributed the plague of the sage to being strongly stretched; and then you inquired about that subtle tenta, and did not feel it; but rather the sensation was pointed at the right ear, and then you suspected that the puncture was due to the extremity of the sage.
And you applied plaster to the place where it was placed, which is attractive and digestive, convincing me that the place would be apostemized so that it appears to me as the place of the sage, so that it succeeds over that.
And you didn't notice the significant accident that the sage had reached that place; and you continued to apply plaster over it for many days without noticing an accident; and the plague was consolidated, meanwhile, and the patient was relieved of the extremity of it for many days until one day I felt the sage inside my nose and recognized it as mine.
And then you paused on the acute corrosive medicinal plague for many days until it was opened, and with that tent you tested it, and strongly attributed the extremity of the subtle sage, which adheres to the foundation.
And then you adjusted in the perception of the plague for that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the sage, and I passed time on that for a period of time until four months.
And then because the plague was amplified, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I remained there, and did not obey the sentiment, since you did not cease to subtle and ingenious about that in many ways of ingenuity, until one day began on that in many ways of ingenuous pendre descentment to extract it with forceps, according to the form of those at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the plague.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and you restored it and the plague is consolidated, and it is healthy through entire sanctity, and I did not notice any cause in it.
And you recommended to you the quality of extraction of some sages for pauses that rule and significance over what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended in narration nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the artisans know how to compare a little about many things; and it is present over what is absent; and they perform new operations and novel instruments, which are given to the descent of the external causes of the art when they accelerate.
And therefore you say that sages are not forgotten from the members in which they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other party.
And that which is forgotten by the place where it enters, or is a sage proceeding from a carnal place, and is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the sentiment of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purged, and its attraction and egress are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in you and does not obey your sentiment, then leave that for some days and try that in attraction and motion on any day, and already it is forgotten.
And if it does not obey your sentiment for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the sage on that whole part of the total party subtly until the place is amplified by the sage, and then extract it.
But if the sage is already hidden in the place of the body, and is hidden from sentiment, then you inquire about that subtle tenta, and if you feel it, then attract it with some instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here there are neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you feel over the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the sage.
And if you have held the patient's ears, then you will liberate the flesh where it is stuck to the entire affected area so that you may be able to remove; and investigate above that, if you cannot get past the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting of those entrails.
When you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all internal parts so that it makes an effort; and subtly use a subtle delicacy so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
And if you cannot get past that at your time, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in its circuit can be purified, and then you iterate that which is alleviated. Perhaps if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer that which we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
And beware of your vertebrae's incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer gentle manipulation in all possible ways to facilitate the evacuation of the arrow; and make it easy and tranquil and slow and firm, just like you and your recommended treatment.
And thus you make a counter-action to the arrow so that the patient's figure is according to the shape in which the arrow has been embedded, because it is more just and beneficial. Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten for the opposite part of the other side, or which have already proceeded to some part of the outside, or have made the extremity of the arrow swollen by sentiment of the part above the codena propenda and sometimes that eminent; then you see about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you attract it, because it is made lighter for the judgment.
Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to counter-action so that the arrow emerges from the bone, and amplify its measurement, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then iterate that until you see improvement.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you pull it out with your hand.
Perhaps if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then you introduce it, if it is dull, strongly fix it so that it enters the cavity of the arrow in the hollow of the shaft and then pull it out with your hand.
Perhaps if the arrow is concave, then you pull it out with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with that which is convenient.
And if the arrow has fallen into the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is close to where you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to see about that, then see about that and beware of incision of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then apply a compress if it is indicted, and cure it until it is healed.
The way to use forceps is with those that are adapted to attract the arrows:
Like the extremities of birds with a beak like an eagle's, which are made sharp like a saw when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not let go.
And of those are made many special modes, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of the slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
like a beam for the sake of alleviating the instrument in the arrow's concave cavity and it is pulled out with that.
On the phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, which normally customarily phlebotomize thus... of those that are in chapter 16. there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. More veins that are swollen in the arms are. Because of those it is a cephalic one, and it descends from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's noisy, and it's a migiera vein, and it's composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and it's called "citillar", and the commoners call that "vein of the belly"; and it ends at the arm, and it's placed over the focus, and it's there where it becomes swollen, and it's there that appears over the fingers for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein that is between the auricular finger and the little finger, and so in both arms.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is that which arises from the curvature of the knee of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for chronic and migrating and sahaftic and ulcerous bad headaches.
And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you recommend to yourself: it is that it should be rubbed on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the occiput in the place of both veins with a gentle friction; then strongly hold the patient's seat with a bandage entering that appears in the two places near the ears on both sides of the head; and search for it in the entire finger, and if you feel the pulse of those in the entire finger, there you will find it.
Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incisive, and then you introduce it below the vein in the codeina so that the swollen blood comes out to the bone. And then you raise your hand on the vein and codeina to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incisive cut in an incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strongly hold the poultices and apply them to it so that it becomes healthy.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the treatment of swelling is for ancient and badly deviated and assiduous obtalmia and body of acute overflowing fluids to the wheels.
And the quality of swelling those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrict the patient's seat with a motive that appears in both veins to manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse of those in the entire finger; and then you will find it.
And then you raise the codeina above the vein to the upper parts of the entire finger, and introduce the swollen blood incidentally below, and raise the vein in its place; and incise it thus as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to your need.
And then you release the constriction of the patient, and place the entire finger on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that joint and poultices and strongly hold it above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it becomes healthy.
And now the remembrance of them is preceding, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And so the treatment of swelling of the vein of the forehead is for the swelling of the cephalic vein to ancient evils of the face and migrating and rough and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the swelling of it is according to what you recommend to yourself; it is that the patient strongly holds the seat with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it:
Stop at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and percuss it with a pin or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strongly hold it so that it becomes healthy.
And some swollen veins are opened in the swollen latent, however it does not cover that the swelling is of acute extremity thus as the other swellings, unless it is of the lazy extremity, and swells that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly holds the trencary in it the swelling when it is subtle.
More the treatment of the two veins that are as lacrimal of two wheels for scabies of the wheels by roughness and sebaceous in the wheels, and to the evils of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches out their neck in a bandage, and then you perform the bloodletting there, and you stand over their head.
It is done the bloodletting according to the transverse and longitudinal method with little bloodletting in a few places, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is subtle, then the extremity of the patient is wounded.
And then run out the blood as much as is necessary to you, and stop on those joints, and stretch them for one night, and then release them.
The bloodletting of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and strong sweating, and for the diseases of the face and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, and it is more effective when it is ancient.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches out their neck and you place your left hand on their nose, and take the subtle bloodletting from the vein at the bridge of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Make sure you ultimately put your hand on the small bloodletting point by point and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because that is restored with great relief.
The help of the bloodletting of the two guiding veins leads to a constriction of the bad and a commencement of the leprosy and many evil diseases and impetigo and bad corrosive ulcers, also with herpes.
And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that the patient stretches out each one on their neck with a ligament; and there are the artificial devices over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then perform the bloodletting on the vein at length with small and ample bloodletting point by point; and then extract blood according to temperate quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the ligament and stretch the two veins with a moderate structure so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay them down in the morning because the wound is healed.
And the help of the bloodletting of the Algerich veins is beneficial for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and for bad ulcers that are on the nose and in their circumference.
And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that you make the patient sit down in front of you, and stretch their neck with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and that is why there are many small black veins in their circumference; and then you insert each one for an incidental insertion.
If there is doubt in you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand the incision of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest one of those.
And make it similar to the two veins that are on the upper lips.
The help of the two veins that are below the tongue is to perform the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for suffocations that are in the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and lift their tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to black.
And then bloodlet those; and be careful that you do not ultimately put your hand on the bloodletting of those, because below those are arteries.
And the two veins that are bloodletted in the body are those in which blood is customarily collected from all homes, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two manners, either by putting the bloodletting mirror or olive green subtlety declining; or by cutting with a fleam, and calling it "alnessil", and this is their form.
It is the side of it also with times, and converges to open the concave full veins apparently gross, and to those that contain gross blood turbulent.
And this bloodletting is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to bloodletting of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
More of the juice from the flebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the bad humors that are deposited in the gouty foot and colon, and thus it cleanses the chest and belly.
And it is convenient for the flebotomizer, when he performs that flebotomy, to hold the vein well and be above it in fear of it, because it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood, so that he may not perform flebotomies with a pungent flebotomy, unless he is skilled like an expert.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave it and move to another, or seek some other ramification; or that you perform flebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and thus you will have performed flebotomy with expert skill as we have said.
More, if you want to perform flebotomy on the thigh, then it is necessary to denude the structure of the arm that touches the place inside where you conjoin the place of the pulses, and place a sign above the hand in tension; and place the arm and thus you will have performed flebotomy with expert skill as we have said; and beware that you do not strike percussion on any space of the place of the artery.
And when you strike, with a strong liaison, inflammation occurs at the place where you have touched with tension, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and thus avoid it.
And if the blood flows in the flebotomy as if from a child's vein, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood; and then you touch and pause the tie there for a long space; and place the tie there, and if the blood stops, because many veins are stopped, then you strengthen the arm and release it.
And beware of the patient's moaning from that, and be above-fearful of it and do not touch it for some days until it is healed.
More, if the blood does not stop, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for that, then you insert the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or take a small thread of floss, and do that, and take one vein and strengthen it over the place of the vein with descending structure in liaison and with pulvils until another day.
And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then cure it with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the liaison of the arm.
More, from the dark vein, the flebotomy is juice that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and to the inferior part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the flebotomizer to be above-fearful in the flebotomy of it, because below that is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy and touches the nerve, he will cause stupor, and it is difficult to heal it, and often it does not heal completely. And this nerve appears with many veins at the sentiment; and if it is hidden at some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it is necessary that you pause the flebotomy in the way that you perform flebotomies with expert skill, and avoid the nerve with your fortitude.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you will find the vein in its longitude.
The juice of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the bad humors of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this property, if you want to perform flebotomy with a pungent flebotomy olive or myrtle flebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because it is not below an artery nor nerve.
More, Emperor, it is strong that you are apostemized in some homes, when it is not flebotomized by the primary percussion, more do not touch anything regarding that aposteme.
The first of it is that you need to know that flebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution against the coming of bad humors, and that it be performed flebotomy on one of the veins that are in the body, thus: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it be performed flebotomy at the beginning of spring, above fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the digestion, when it appears with signs of replenishment.
It should be a feverish bout of flatulence on the third day or at the first pus that has passed three hours since yesterday morning.
Greater is the flatulence that is administered, greater is the convenience and necessity to evacuate it, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any circumstances.
And it is known that if the infant has not had flatulence until he is fourteen years old, and a woman who has not had flatulence until the fourth month within the seventh, and the veins are not flatulent which have already passed sixty years.
And since it is good to be flatulent for any manner of being, it is known that the mondifique (womb) purifies the intestines within the flatulence by cleansing the veins, if in those there is retained matter, so that the veins do not attract superfluous fluids in the flatulence of the intestines, which are pure, and do not disturb the principal members.
And there are no flatulent patients with nauseous and sacretive crapula, nor do they evacuate from malady or from ebriety until it is removed from their loins, nor from hydropic malady, and it is more that flatulence is tempered by a proper colic passion and vomiting, and a proper belly pain, and a proper multiplication of the gut and of trouble and of exercise of fasting or of vigilias and of all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it is a corporal28 or animal one.
And properly consider the subtlety of humors within it if the blood is gross, with vines and beasts, and with medicines if it is possible to reduce it to its proper limit.
And properly enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or is excited by some exercise so that the blood may be subtle.
And pause the flatulence of it in the feet of the day, so it is around the hour of Terce (Terce is a canonical hour, approximately 9:00 am), thus as we have said.
And beware that the feet of that one are guarded on that day from all evil accidents, animals, thus as is anguish, ire, fear, and from all corporal accidents, thus as is trouble and pain and superfluous gut and semblance to them.
And in its sessile surface, let the causes be present in the use of which correct custom of the men is accustomed to aromaticity and odorament and with balms and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the flatulence administrator over a cushion that is placed above the cushion of that one who should be flatulent.
And properly extract the sieve's arm, and rub that with its hand the flatulence administrator for two or three times; and properly strengthen the ligament in the correct way and involve those two times.
And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body's blood essence.
And properly the structure, it is known that one who should be flatulent rubs his hands repeatedly between them until the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sentiment.
And properly the flatulence administrator anoints the sieve of flatulence with a few drops of ancient proper oil; and properly pause the sieve of indication on the left hand over that vein, below the place where you want the flatulence, so that the vein receives a few drops, and the percussion is seated because of the veins it is that which attracts thus as a fleeing cord gives rise to flatulence, and of those it is full of windiness and when it pauses the flatulence on that one, it is contracted thus as the flatulence administrator; and the flatulence does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that one is stretched.
And therefore, for that reason it is known that the flatulence administrator should be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And properly pause the flatulence, more if the vein is opened in one way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above where there is festination, if the place is not apostematized.
And if the place is apostematized, or the malady spreads, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because a strong apostema attracts caution, nor do you enter into a bath.
And properly iterate flatulence if it loves.
And if the perception is petite and corrects the blood subtly, and you fear that it does not give the quantity that you want, then you iterate the flatulence in that passage according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do so with festination within that place is apostematized, because the place is apostematized in many homes where there is little perception.
More if the times are already apostematized, then do not iterate over it, because it does not excuse you from any cause; and pause on that certain part of the wound of oil, because it alleviates the body's blood essence. And it is better in this place with oil and that the other oils.
It seems that the medicine is administered by pouring oil into the entire flebotomy area where the flebotomes, which are veins, prohibit the flow of blood in the body, and when this tyriaca is poured into one of those areas above the spot, because the blood is subtle and revolves when it is gross.
And if in the area of the flebotomy a great abscess is generated, because many veins are gathered together, and it is especially suitable for one who has not been bled except that vein, or in the perception of the small vein, and then you touch, and pause on the spot, applying a sponge infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and hold it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And it is necessary to make that approach the sentiment of the blood in that vein, either in complement of it or of another vein.
And if you find in the spot for several days some blackness or viridity, do not notice that; and if you want, pause on that cause of aloen and of mirra dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or of calendula or similar to it.
And many gathered veins thus produce abscesses and eminent signs of flebotomy in the basilica (vein).
And then place your hand over that, and if then you feel a softness of the compression on that, then that sign is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you pause on that cause of that which we have said, because it strengthens the flow of the arterial blood.
And make an implant in that which is stipulated, so that the spot becomes hardened, and then take care to heal that with another cure until it is healthy.
And it is necessary to extract from the blood of every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears over the blood, as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acidity of it is stopped.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a vein, that the flebotomy of the vein be amplified and the flebotomes be wide.
And in one who is frail, the opposite of that should be done, and it is necessary to extract that in many veins, and that the trachea should be straight.
And the best way to administer in flebotomy of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not a puncture.
And this manner of flebotomy is free from the flow of blood and irritation of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than flebotomy according to width and length.
And at the time when it is accustomed to come upon syncopes of the flebotomy, and it is necessary that you cure that during the flebotomy with a small piece of cloth infused in wine of milgranas or of simple oximel scalded; and extract from there three or four veins.
And if it is complicated by complexity, then take beforehand during the flebotomy to infuse in a syrup of mirra or in a syrup of mel aromatized with special spices such as pepper, cane, ginger and similar, or in a syrup aromatized and very fragrant.
And if syncopes of the flebotomy occur, and it is a cause of much blood issuance, then it is necessary to take in drinking water of carn and syrup very fragrant subtle; and use aromaticity with algae, and be limited to the seven feet in that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncopes for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate the seven veins and dissolve the seven blood vessels secondarily, it is necessary for him from whom the flebotomy is for much evacuation, and the virtue of it is fragile, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But whoever wants to evacuate the seven veins, and cut the seven blood vessels secondarily, and the seven bodies are strong, then make that approach for seven hours or nine of the first flebotomy day.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of the seven bodies against the contrary of the party that declines, it is necessary to evacuate on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and acidic and makes fever occur, it is necessary to cut the blood in one vein and be of great quantity and amplify the perception until it occurs syncopes, since you have conserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the body's blood vessels, so that no death occurs in the spot of syncopes, because many veins end there when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not suitable when you want to release the vein and evacuate the blood secondarily, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult for the blood issuance, that you press underneath with vehemence and the curvature is extended lengthwise, because that is too bad.
Having the patient lie down so that the flow of blood is slowed down secondarily; or remove what is in the way of the blood flow that is coagulated in the narrowness of the vein; or apply on top of that a poultice of dragon's blood, or of sagzenea, and compress it with a ligature so that the blood flows out slowly.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed him at that spot or in another arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is flow-blocked in the area of the fork or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the blood flow in him is that the patient inserts his hand into warm water so that the focal point becomes red and the vein appears manifestly.
And then it is strengthened over that same ligament with a mild stricture; and then the blood flow is directed according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor according to the longitude.
And it is a broad perception and it is your blood flow that you direct towards the junction of the hand, a small one.
And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you soak the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you obtain what you need.
However if you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from soaking the hand in warm water, and it is during winter time that the course of the blood is placed in warm water.
And the blood flow of this vein is more saved than all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the blood flow of the little vein of the right hand is conducive to the illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of the blood flow in him is that you strengthen the hand with a ligament or with your own hand, because you have put it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the witness; and then the blood flows transversely; and if you insert it into the whole nostril, you will not know what is being done there.
And be careful not to overdo your hand in the blood flow, because then it is the nerves of the fingers that are exposed and stripped of flesh.
And then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not soak it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the narrowness of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly, take care that you do everything in a straight and tight manner.
However, the improvement of the blood flow of that vein of the left hand is conducive to the illnesses of the spleen.
And do similarly in his blood flow as you have done in the other.
And the improvement of the cephalic vein in the blood flow is for the illnesses that are below the belly, as well as the illnesses of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and old wounds, and for their similar illnesses.
And the quality of the blood flow in him is that the patient inserts his foot into warm water and makes friction on it until the veins appear; and he puts it on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein shows itself beneath the toes, and from there it ramifies on the surface of the foot to the toes.
And then blood flows more amply from there below the leg to the heel and to the aggregation of it, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you blood-flow it on the surface of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and pause your blood flow in the way you blood-flow it through the crossing, lest you want to insert it.
And it is a visible blood flow.
However, if the blood flow is prohibited; then you soak his foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it is evacuated.
And if the blood-flow doctor errs in the first vein, then soak it in his own blood flow, because the place is healthy; and do not fear his evil, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the cephalic vein of the other foot in the same way.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is similarly as we have said beneath the heel below the hollow of the wild part.
And the improvement of the blood flow in him is for pain in the ankle when it is due to cold blood.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that they enter into a bath, and fasten and strengthen the thigh of the patient from the ankle to above the foot for four fingers in a long subtle bandage, because it does not appear as if for anything else.
And therefore when it appears, then you fleubotomize that according to each engineer who says it is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or inject it for injection or section it for section, because the place of the patient is healthy.
And it is in most homes somewhat hidden; and if you touch it, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then fleubotomize some vein of the patient, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular and ring fingers.
And beware of the nerves, and make sure to run with the blood the quantity that you want.
And then release the structure and pause over the place of the fleubotomia, and strengthen the place, because gradually it is healthy.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventilate with horns, or with iron, or with a vein.
And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two manners, because it is either with a focus or without a focus.
And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are 13 places of the body, among which one is where pauses are made for ventilation in the armpit, and it is the last part of the head; and the thousandth place of the arm beside the two parts of the neck; and ventilations beneath the mandible below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is above the end of the hip; and ventilations of two focuses, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch virtue through them, thus as it is accustomed to do for fleubotomia; nor does it cover that ventilation should be done with a focus or without a focus in any malady done for replenishment until the whole body is evacuated.
But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for a malady or for continuity, administer it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be done more than two or three hours past the day.
And the youthful benefit of ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and at what is profound in the eyes; but it covers that this should be a proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place of fleubotomia of the cephalic (head).
And it is not lawful to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great annoyance.
And for this reason it does not cover that the use of those is old, and in the heads of which there are frequent maladies.
But to him who continues above that which is done oblivion; and for this reason it covers that you command the ventilator to pause his hand a little at the ventous parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of the alkehel is in the place of fleubotomia of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers asthma, and to the constriction of the wings and to the scission of the instrument of the wings, and to all, and to replenishment.
And it covers that the ventilation of the alkehel is impelled a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, and emigration, and preface, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomia of the basilica.
And you should command the ventilator to not press their hand on the scarification so that the artery is not cut and fluid flows from it.
And you should ventilate by applying cotton to the mouth, and corrupting the gum, and it seems like one of the evils that are in the mouth, and instead of a florid botany that is on the two lips.
More ventilation that is done over the two spatulas confers heat, which is done for replenishment of warmth.
And the ventilation of the two divided parts of the focal points confers juvenation of the florid botany of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because it attracts the blood from all those veins plus manifold that are in the flesh, and those slender veins from the other gross veins enter so that perversion attracts to the three veins.
And command the ventilator to not proceed with scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and instead of that, it has nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation that is ventilated over the hips and confers on the hemorrhoids of the buttock and the ulcers, instead.
And you should command the ventilator to be a great ventilation, and that it be of iron, because the place indicates a strong desiccation; and strongly they have traumatized subtle ventilations and it is scarified in scarification.
More ventilations of the minor channels are manifested for minimal manifestation, because they attract the blood from all the body, and confer on ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruations, and confer on bother and adhesion; and instead of a florid botany of two siphons, and of the auricula, and of two cavities.
Empirical method to debilitate the whole body and make an accident in many homes.
And from the ventilations of the auricula, the juvenation is propagated to the juvenation through the ventilations of two channels.
And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that it pauses the ventilation at the beginning of the void and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the ventilations, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains coagulated, and so that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingression. And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen and that appears the rigor of the blood.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, you should scarify him gently and not strongly, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to amplify the scarification and take a little, and temper the suction to facilitate it.
And if the blood is gross, then you should scarify two gentle times, because in the first gentle time it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its acquosity. More in the second, there is scrutiny acquired from the extraction of gross blood.
And if the blood is very filthy, then a third scarification should be made for the third gentle time, so that it purges the dirt.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is gross, then you should scarify with profound scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the codena only so much.
And if that one whose codena is gross, hard, fusca, and the sieus pores are so strait, you should make the places of the ventilations very gentle, open and resolute; if it is in summer, thus as it is oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of tender shoots, or oil of cemensa of coja; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of liri, or oil of camamilla, or of blood, and to those that seem.
And if the superflooding is gross, fresh, then the oil should be amaranthine, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloen, or oil of anet, and to those that seem.
More if the ventilator is of ample pores of tender flesh, then you should prohibit oil, and command that to those places of ventilations of their own proper ventilation, whether it be washed with warm waters or fresh water of solatrum, or water of coja, or water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, wash its ventilations with wine vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And that one whose superflooding is gross, wash its ventilations with wine anticum, or water of sansuc, which is majorana, or decoction of anet, or camamilla, and to those that seem.
It is necessary that the ventilation should be watched from the beginning of the bath; it is necessary that it be administered at the same moment of the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep afterwards with the ventilation.
What is required to be regulated is that bloodletting should be done from the veins before ventilation.
You should consider the beginning: then if the ventilator or he who is to be bled is choleric and vents about the thin blood and inflammation, then you should take causes of cooling, such as milk of acetosas, and endive in a wine agreeable and laxatives, and scammon, and julip, and similar things.
And pause at the suitable times, as with poultices, and pieces of soft boiled eggs, and cooked vegetables with herbs, and similar things.
And of that one whose complexion is fresh, you should take in drink essence of roses, or essence of scammon of serene thoughts, and sumac, and very odorant mixture between viel and noel; and it is commanded that use be made of paucity of drink and of eating, and pause the vegetables of his poultice and cannabis and peppers and small eggs and doves.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventilation and bloodletting, the drink should be more abundant than the food.
And it is necessary that there be given in drink at certain hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or citrine before ventilation or before bloodletting or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtled; and it is not necessary that they take that scalf.
The ventilations that are scarified are those that are paused on the feet, and on the worse part and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pixida of the narrow, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those except attraction of blood from a member, as with poultice on the thigh in malady of flux of blood of the veins; and use of that to dissolve fresh ventilated viscosity of the member, as with poultice on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and scales it and reduces the pain since it resolves ventilation.
And it is paused on the joints when they accumulate in their opacity or pores, because through virtue of strong attraction the humble opacity and eradicates the pores from their place.
And similarly it is done when it is paused on the feet and worse part, so that ventilation is induced in those enclosed areas.
And these ventilations are administered with suction as much as possible; and some are administered at the fire.
And some are administered full of water tepid in the maladies of the worse part.
And that is why the ventilation should be full and should be bigger, so it is warm water alone or water in which are cooked herbs to that convenient.
Form of ventilation administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the punction should be the size of a palm; and let it be in the width of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of it, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Let it be made of iron or copper, with thick margins, lion, hinges and ties so that it does not leave the member its position on it.
And let it be in the middle of the iron or copper transverse rod, where the candle is paused at the fire.
And it is this big ventilation greater than the one which we have recommended; and the lesser pause of that according to the maladies and the state of he who uses that.
And the ventilations of the exhausted and thin ones are others than the ventilations of the young and of thick corporatures.
And the quality of pausing this ventilation at the fire on the member is that it extends the flame at the fire decently from a pause of a candle of wax, and pauses it on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle place of the ventilation, so that the fire is kindled around the part below, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
And it is paused on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the tube that we have said, until when we have the ventilations and do not induce that the finger opens and the vapor exits over that tube, then the ventilation will be almost dissolved.
And properly ignite the flame according to its manner, and then that is induced if they are induced from that.
There is a ventilation that is administered in the malady of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse rod nor tube, and it is not administered except that it is full of water, and it is paused on the member as much as possible.
And this is its form: And this vaporous matter, the more it is abundant, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 147.
Bloodletting is not administered in many members, but rather in those members where it is not possible to apply cups, due to the scarcity of those, thus like the foot and gum, which resemble them; or in a denuded member of flesh, thus like the finger and nose, which resemble them.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups which are on the thick, fleshy parts of the body.
And then lay them in thick water overnight so that they become soft, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleabotomia and cups; and then wash the patient's members until they are red; and then place them on top of it.
And when they are full and fall.
And if it is possible to suck from the place where the cup is, it is better to delay in giving aid.
And otherwise, then wash the place with vinegar and then apply much water; and it should be washed and expressed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged by the removal of the cups, and it is residue, then dip a cloth in cold water, and place that on top until the residue is absorbed.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder on top of it with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar to those of the stiptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the spot the crushed heads of roasted fava beans, and leave them on until they adhere to the spot, and the blood is absorbed.
And be careful, if it is necessary, repetition of bloodletting, when it is possible to move those.
And if the bloodletting cups are prohibited from suspension, then wash the place with recent blood or stick a needle in the places until it reaches blood; and then place them, because those who feel any blood at all adhere to it.
And when you want them to fall, powder on top of them a little triturated aloe, or salt, or cinder, and it will fall immediately.
Thus begins the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and common people, who for some time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the sciences on our earth is private; and I do not have it and oblige in anything at all times; and I do not adapt to what comes after, except by long reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until I extract the science from them.
And then I direct my experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that which contains my science and on which I have passed my experiment; for I have abbreviated it to you others and delivered it from occupation of elongation; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed it into many forms of instruments which are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter First.
Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary preliminary is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse ones, if singular. Therefore, I will discuss in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning are foreseen by the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt that they know or apprehend this noble art better than you.
And therefore I say that when accidents happen, such as fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall, then it is necessary for you to turn to the beginning with fleabotomia or to lift up that, or whatever steps, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that which happens suddenly, or in decrepitating, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and all diets that fill the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regimen, in which they customarily corrode with it.
And then, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and gross nutriment, thus as viscous diets made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and capers, and peas, and cow's stomachs, and hooves, and fresh fish, and gross and similar to those, and on this regimen it is done coagulation of fracture by ligament and marrow.
It seems that the bones are brittle when they are in the men who were in the prime of life and in decay, it is not possible that they can continue and consolidate according to their nature for the desiccation of their limbs.
But the Emperor of Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of the whole affected part for a similar cause that seems like glue in which it is thickened so that it adheres and strengthens until it becomes conglutinated and reunited, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the veins of the patient, veins in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.
And it is known that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter apart from the others.
Many varieties of fracture in the same member. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their members; because there is made an arched fracture another that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the cartilage and tendons, proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to each species there is a proper torment or treatment in the restoration of it according to what will come as a remembrance of it in its own distinct place.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by which a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and so of it when it comprehends with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor does it feel deviated from its proper touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is a twisting or small fissure, so much that you do not feel it with your hand and total compression; however, pause over it from the medications of which I have remembrance to apply at that moment what is convenient for the place; and then it will be straightened by subtle structuring.
And it is known that the place where it is arched and not divided into two or another that does not occur in the cartilage, just as the whole part of its comparison, then it is felt that it begins from your hour to rectification of it, however, it has reached a posthumous apostema caution.
And if it has reached a posthumous apostema caution, then it will leave that for some days until the apostema ceases; and then it will be wrapped according to whatever manner you can of elevation and of ingenium.
And it is known that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is less troublesome than that of the bone in which it occurs, thus cartilage.
And then it will be strengthened according to what will come as a remembrance of it.
But if the bone is cartilaginous, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you will perform that they return to their ingenium and according to whatever manner you can place them in their places.
And beware yourself according to your strength that you do not exceed over the patient by your operation of the limb nor lesion; and perform yourself according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as its companion according to their best forms.
And it is felt that at that hour you will profitably touch with your hand there, and if sometimes here is another diverse cause, rectify it and wrap it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors who make veiled ones that make posthumous apostema caution through their operation, or make contrition in the member, just as we have seen that for the operation of their veiled ones.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which you should recommend; for you know that the members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small thus like the arm and the finger and the knee, then it is fitting that the wrapping should be with very subtle cloth.
But those that are large thus like the thigh or the leg, it is fitting that in those there should be a strong and hard wrapping, because the strong connection connects the big member and strengthens all parts of the entire structure, so that no stain enters.
And then begin, and make your evacuation of equity, pause the convenient wrapping over that place of the fracture with three or four wrappings according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little in the wrapping.
And then see that you have arrived at the superior part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen your mind so that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture which has strengthened it. And then lengthen your wrapping around the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure gradually, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side over the place of the wrapping, and then see that you have the wrappings at the superior part below the fracture; and let your operation be in the structure of the wrapping and in softening of it according to what we have said in the primary wrapping above.
And then pause between the turns of the wrapping, whether it's a piece of cloth or a bandage, in which the twisting of the fracture is engaged, if there is twisting; and if not, do not pause at all in any case.
And then pause over the other bandage, and then engage properly on these wrappings, done decently and gently, if in the place there is no inflammation or aposteme of caution, and then pause over that which sits on the aposteme and removes the inflammation; and let it be so for some days; and then you strengthen over the entire structure.
And these are the structures of the marrow of a cane of strong race, and be formed skillfully; or of wood of pine; or of strips of palm; and let each structure be wide according to this form and this figure:
However, it is fitting that the structure which is placed over that fracture be thicker and stronger a little than the other structures, and the length of the stem according to what is suitable for the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the structures with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is distant from the fracture, it mends the structure.
And it is fitting that the threads be mediocre in thickness and subtlety, and are of silk; and if the threads are thick, thus as you have seen by the operation of some foolish people pausing the threads of the cord of the tort, and it is a great error, when one cuts the structure without equality.
And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not conserve the structure in those waters that you want, and it is not fitting that between one stem and another stem there be less than a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stems to the structure in those places, then pause below those of cloth or Carmena's bandage until it does not cause them harm.
Some veiled fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
And you know that all broken members are not straightened on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not fit to pause over the stems unless after five or seven days, according to your security of advent of cautious aposteme.
And this is the manner of the ancient plasterers who restored them, which were placed over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of plastering as an aid to restoration of fracture, convenient for many complex and major injuries to women and children, because it is about that which does not receive heat nor cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
And you find that thus as it is, except that you cleanse it with the white of egg, and pause the composition of that which does not spread nor subtle; and then use that.
Another manipulation for implanting fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the remedy for salvaging a thousand grains; one dram of mirra and one dram of aloen; two drams of alochil; all are mixed and stirred in water or album to heal if the complexity of the patient's scalp is scabrous; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite conveniently, and confers a great remedy.
Another manipulation for implanting which confers a fracture and torso: recipe of migrach and met of white alta one dram x; of mirra and of aloen one dram v; of acacia one dram vi; of Armenian boil two drams xx.
All together thrice-clarified in a mortar with great contrition, and twice-distilled, and twice-cooked with water or album of Huou and so administered.
Method of plaster for joints and separated bones in their places, and sudden pain accident in those and cracks and fractures: take a woolen cloth and soak it in warm oil and wax, and place it over the area.
Moreover, this plaster is not effective for restoration, but rather for abscesses, cauterizing and properly expelling pains.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take flowers of dry fig tree and flowers of wild poppy; mix all together and make a plaster of it.
Method of plaster quickly administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution from the remaining abscess: take roots of altlea, chamomile, flowers of violas, flour of peas, all together in a partition. Thrice-clarified and thrice-cooked with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Moreover, if it is scalded, then confers that with water of colyander or with water and use it.
Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolution than the first, when it happens that an abscess persists despite the restoration of the member: take roots of altlea and seeds of lime, and balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of viol, chamomile, all together in a partition; thrice-clarified and thrice-cooked with water of sage or water of two waters or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed over the trembling member for its restoration, unless a wax cerate is made with wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it should be mixed between grossitude and subtlety.
Moreover, Gualia has seen that they are placed over the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which it is exsiccate with little warmth, thus as with mirror, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that confers on lesion and pain: take migat, cedars, skins of wild man inscized or penalty of auzel, and altlea, and salt, all together in partitions; thrice-clarified, twice-distilled, and thrice-cooked, and make a plaster.
Moreover, the quantity according to which it is necessary that the ligation remains and then it should be dissolved, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken nor moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days. And if there occurs a violent pain or swelling or inflammation at the location, then you should bind or delay it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take a drap of lime and humid marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the location until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place over it a woolen cloth submerged in warm oil and wax, or rose oil, and leave it on for nine hours until you are secure of abscesses, and the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is removed.
And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, not too strong for your primary construction, and subtly mix it until it is healthy.
And if sometimes the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are so removed from everything, and you are weary of plaster and structure, then you iterate that as I have done from the beginning of the treatment.
And if none of those causes occur to the member that we have mentioned, then do not delay it but rather wait three days or four or five; or seven. and some wet applications all that is left for twenty days according to what appears to you for the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust it more in the structure of the greatest primary totality, and assist in the engrossing of the patient's food, according to how it is preceded by their reminiscence.
Perhaps you sometimes discover the place of the fracture and extend it more so that it does not close, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from reaching there; and thus embrocate that water with a decoction of three vegetables that are well-guarded; and do this for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and through this operation correct the member to receive the nutrient, and it will heal more quickly.
Perhaps that is when they make restoring remedies for the fracture of the member another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to how it closes, and it is restored according to its own natural tendency, which is an error according to their operation, and there is great fear, and if you were a director, you would increase the Antics in their free books and would have worked on that.
And I have not seen any of them who have done so far, because it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter according to: Of the fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion passes through all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, thus as if it were in the chest, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the spine is divided into some part of the bone, and divides the flesh of it and does not pass beyond the rear of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and the cause of it is percussion with a blow or fall on stone, and its symptoms are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating which already approaches the peritoneum which is behind the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture it is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species of fracture is called capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made by fall or by percussion of stone and its symptoms are similar, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location thus as it occurs to the roles of eram when it occurs to their percussion and it is divided from their entrance into the divided parts.
And mostly it is made in the bodies of humid bones, thus as if they are heads of fantasy.
And so all these species of fractures are evil, so they are weights thus as if they were separate stars. And I will find a remedy for all that in its place.
And I will recognize all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that is above them.
And the capillary species is recognized by this that it is discovered over the bone, and it is cleaned, and limited to its tents, because the fracture appears black.
Perhaps in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you sometimes perceive through the accidents that signify by manifest significance over fear, thus as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of judgment, and syncope, and acute fever, and displacement of the veins and rigor of those, and similarity to their accidents in the major dispositions, if it does not heal.
And if you sometimes encounter non-concurrent accidents, then you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
Which cause is because if it has come to you the plague in the beginning as it was a plague and that is in the days of winter, then it covers that you studied in the osteument of the bone within the 14th day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it covers that you touched or starred the bone within the 7th day, having that which is behind the bone is corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents we have recounted happen.
And if the fracture has reached the peritoneum covering the brain, and it is among divided parts and attraction, then it covers that you inject the comminuted and attracted part, according to what I have recounted to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner possible for you according to the figure of the plague, and that it be easier on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, with blood or apostemic caution, then you oppose yourself to that which covers, and it is that you fill the place of draps infused with wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until it is seated in the aposteme, and be sure of the flow of blood; and begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And this is done according to one of two manual operations.
One method is that you insert the bone in an instrument of straight style, and this is its form: Then administer another instrument, slightly longer than that; and this is its form.
Then administer more instruments longer than the second one.
And it is necessary to have a variety of different instruments, some of which are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, and they are in the rear of the treatment of their extremities, and they are for ironing out or felting.
And use them to facilitate percussion on the instruments so that it does not hit the head and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary to perforate in the circuit of the dentition before you administer the instruments with the trolleys, which are called non-deep trolleys.
And it is not called thus because those do not reach the term of the bone to that which is next to it, so that the trolley is rounded at the extremity or margin above that which is below the head of the ague, resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trolleys which almost converge on the thickness of each bone, so that it is present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is ague, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of trolleys: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the trolley on the bone and revolves it with the ties until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permute the trolley to another location, and pause because it is between all the tracts the quantity of the grossness of the radius or environment.
And then insert the instruments into the instruments that are between each tract of the bone, and make them more subtle so you can operate on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause by stirring up the instruments which will be prepared for that, as we have discussed, and with forceps and subtle tools.
And it is necessary that you keep all caution so that the instrument does not touch any part of the vertebrae.
And thus when you have perforated the bone, it will be separated from the vertebrae if it is continued in it, and you will extract it, it is necessary that you raise and equalize it in the asperity of the bone with another instrument similar to an instrument, more imperious than the other instruments.
And if you find some small parts of the bones and fragments, then take them in a way that is convenient for the instruments; and then cure the wound with liniments and unguents which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is levigation, far from pain, which Galen and others have written about for great usefulness; and this is its sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed it below the extremity of this instrument, slow and gentle, which is its form.
And it is that the lenticular part is alone and does not insert any cause, and the ague part is of it in two lengths ahead in length, as we have said; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the vertebrae on the face of the incident ague in the bone.
And then percute on the instrument of a part with a small hammer until you insert all the bone in a convenient way, as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not happen in any accident that you fear in no manner; certainly, if the medicant was the most foolish of all homes and the most ignorant of them; assuredly, if he were dormant.
Then if you find some additional cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in certain locations of the bone, you will insert it from the extremity of the instrument that lenticular part, and you will deliver it from the convenient way, because it is delivered from its own motion and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absent or removed from the bone is the face of it, and you find in its asperity and subtle fragments, then it is necessary to raise that asperity and radiate those fragments with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all locations most convenient for them and most direct according to what you perceive in the operation on the broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary that you administer in your reason with which you raise the bone at the beginning the most distant from those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from that according to continuity until you reach administering the most tenuous and the most subtle parts of all those.
In any of the other small fractures or subtle breaks, you should administer care according to what is lost in order to restore it.
It is a cause that has not been written about by all those who have studied this art. And we will write about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus (abdominal skin) is drawn back when you radiate the bone, then take drap (a type of cloth or dressing) according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary dressing so that you can apply it more lightly than before, which does not harm the ciphac (a type of surgical instrument); and then administer the lat (a type of bandage) over it, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has so much only.
And let it be thus for a day or two until you are sure of the aposteme's caution; and then remove it and administer medicines that are superfluously dry, such as linseed and farina of barley, and powders of lavender and aristology, and similar to those.
And it is that you make these powdered medicines into a powder to be sprinkled over the wound, just as they are dry; and universally, administer in this total medicine of property that it is what cleanses and does not bite.
And be careful according to your prudence that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of ointment nor another; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and destroys it, and falls upon the patient with a malignant malice.
And it falls upon the ciphac (surgical instrument) of the head, as if it is Mondificat (a type of bone injury) and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is a pernicious total outcome.
And if it does not turn black except from the medicine that is placed underneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a third part of honey and three parts of rose oil. And mix those liquids into a dressing, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the spices of cure that are convenient until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
You know that the nose is not fractured unless two parties are simultaneously broken, or one of those cartilages is veined, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not fractured and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinewiness.
But if one of the two parties of it is fractured, then take care to introduce the small finger into the nasal cavity, and that you should bind that fracture deeply within the thin finger indicating, and within the thin finger before, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do it thus for you have facilitated, and beware that you do not fall into that your operation over the patient's malady.
And if the fracture is in the upper party of the nose, and the finger does not reach to it, then take care that it is equal with the extremity of the radius on which it is slightly thickened.
And if the fracture is in two parties, then you do the same as that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the cautious postulate.
And then insert into the extremity of the nose a small piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one party, or half of two calques, if the fracture is in two parties, and it should be in the thickened calque of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calques were infused in boder, and were permitted for the entire day, but it was not seen by me; however, I have found that the piece is infused in album of huou comfit with powder of moli; and then let the calque be until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And some veined ones were inserted into the nose, in place of calque, penalty of a goat's horn that is enveloped by cloth of lion's skin; and it should be that you already have the fracture of the nose very vehemently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make calques.
And if another veined postulate falls, apply the nose with cerote or cotton stuffed with rose oil, or with diachylon.
More serious cases do not respond to topical treatments, then we must burn the affected area with a hot iron before applying powder made of sulfur and alum, and place a poultice on the affected limb, without neglecting the nose for any reason.
If the nasal bones are fractured in a small crack or so comminuted, then we must dissect around them, and extract them with instruments that fit them; and then suture the wound, and cure it so that it encarnates and consolidates, and apply topical treatments that are convenient.
And if the disease affects the teeth, then we must cure it with medicinal waters and administer canal-shaped instruments of lead until complete health is achieved.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is dislocated and the fracture of it is not a disease, consider then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken in two and curved towards the adjacent teeth, then its treatment is easier.
And so, if the fracture is on the right side, you insert the index finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and press them against the gums to facilitate the reduction of the fractured teeth to their proper place, and in this way you will equalize the bite of the other side.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both separate parts according to their correct alignment until it is possible to equalize them.
And if the teeth are dislodged due to disruption, then you must strengthen those which remain with a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and place a poultice on the fractured jaw, and place a double-layered dressing, and a piece of solid tin held by a long bandage around the jaw; and adjust that underneath according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place food near their bed so they can take it easily.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then you will touch and dislodge it on the third day; and apply rectification to what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of soft powder, alum, or flour of chamomile, since you have removed the crust from it, and place the poultice on the affected limb.
And then add cum sta annex and adjust that poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, so it doesn't dislodge until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
And if another time the disease recurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that aposteme.
And if the fracture is a disease, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or displaced, then you will subtly remove those displacements with instruments that are convenient for removing them.
And if the orifice of the disease is narrow, then you will amplify it with a flea-botomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then when you have removed those displacements, and none will remain, then you will close the orifice of the disease if it is wide; and if not, place one of the poultices that are convenient for it and encarnate it, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the ankle when it is dislocated.
Many times the ankle joint is broken in front of the foot, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch each other; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that it touches in its displacements, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a disease.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a disease, is that you must have two ministers present, so that one holds the injured ankle and the other extends the vein to that affected part.
And then bind the fracture with tight bandages until it takes its natural shape according to what is convenient, and it is not in a prominent place nor concave.
And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place a small cloth or wool underneath the patient's bed, and its greatness according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the ankle and bend the foot with your hand until it binds the fracture according to what is convenient.
And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the ankle to its previous parts, because it has been perverted to the prong, then it is convenient that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place a larger cushion under the muscle of one side in greatness.
And the minister takes the patient's muscle to the divided parts below so that the bone of the elbow is elevated and it is in the press in them, and then you straighten the fracture and anoint those ties with.
Perhaps you feel numbness of the elbow and your wrists, then cover what you find there and extract those numbness to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make a precise incision on them with one of the instruments which have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the elbow the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron from which this is the shape of it.
And it is similar to a hollow cylinder of which this is the concavity; and its width will be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Perhaps the length of it will be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there should be two extremities thus, and one extremity should be ample and the other stretched.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the numbness of the bone is large, and you are sure of a cautious postulate, then you adjust the two lips of the wound to a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a cautious postulate, then you fill the wound with dressing and poultices according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
And if you fear a cautious postulate, then you put a warm dressing on it and anoint with rose oil and wine, and pause above that.
And thus, that the stake does not remain stuck to the broken bone; and for this reason you will see the patient every day, because when the ligament is mollified or the stake is already removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the bond.
And then you put the patient to sleep on their chest, and you put below the titillations of it, so that they sleep in a small space at night; for thus the helper of it is elevated from the side of that, and therefore the fracture of the elbow is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or its arm is tied to the neck.
And do not loosen the ligament unless you fear it will settle in an improper place or postulate, until twelve days.
And then you renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it up to that, and adjust in the structure and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the elbow is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some vegetables are cooked in some houses which are done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
The shoulder blade is broken in its lateral part and does not break except at the edges.
And then when it is broken in its middle part — and it is broken in the middle of its part — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture thus you prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in all manner of engendering which is possible for you.
And then you put above the spot of dust from millet in album of egg white and stoppage of lion; and then you put double poultice dressing; and then you put above it a subtle table stake according to the quantity of the entire shoulder blade or perhaps a little.
Perhaps if the stake is concave in some of the spots of the shoulder blade, then you anoint that concavity with lion's stoppage, and then you balance the stake according to equality.
And then strengthen below with a long human mate by gentle compression and firmness of the stake until it is not removed from its own place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are mollified, another vegetable and strengthen it and equalize the stake if it is removed from its own place.
And you place the patient on a soft mattress.
The splint is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know that it is assured that those are bones which were not joined together nor did they dissolve.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone's fracture and put a bandage underneath, then you divide it above, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the sacred aposteme's furcula, so that it does not become inflamed here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Some feet are broken in the middle of them and that end is twisted; but the extremities of it are moved and communicated.
And of the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the internal parts and becomes inflamed with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and stumbling, and faintness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on a soft bed, and a cushion between their hips; and then press upon the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with two pairs of ribs, and subtly intervene in the operation of it and in its equilibrium according to all manner that is possible and that is convenient, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
And then place a cushion upon the plaster and stopper and a cushion above that of a smooth table or of saffron or of its similar levitation, since you envelop it in a cloth; and then subtly intervene on that over the broken bone so that it is not bruised; and go to the binding according to the retondition of some feet, and strengthen it with decent structure; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that corrosion or putrefaction, or pain, or aposteme that becomes inflamed in the place, then you cut and dissect that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what becomes inflamed through that manner of cure; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is done to that face; and adjust its structure until it is healthy.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that are next to the spine; and of the extremities of their part from the front do not become inflamed unless through those which are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry into its conditions.
And the restoration is thus that it unites the fracture with its conditions according to the possible manner, until it is united as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone in this way, if it is needed for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parts, then it becomes inflamed with vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that becomes inflamed in one who has pleurisy, and because of this the bone puts forth a velament; and it becomes difficult to breathe, and stumbling, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And now the Antiques are ingenious in that with many ingenious remedies.
And of them it is said: it is good that you apply remedies to the patient that induce inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the anterior parts.
We have avoided this because it is not the cause of generating aposteme unless it becomes inflamed; and if it has become inflamed, then it helps towards that.
And some of them said that it should be placed under the windows and then sucked with a strong force; and it is similar to reasoning, but meanwhile I think that the window attracts the superfluities to the place due to debilitation.
And some of them said: it is good that the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that it is the binding that envelops it according to retondition; and then the patient should be cured with a cure of pleurisy through diet and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth a velament with puncture leading, I think about the patient, then it is good that we place upon the place, uncovering the fractured rib, and then pause above that instrument which preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which precedes, and that we facilitate the bone, and extract it.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with coziding, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
And if you encounter an acute abscess, then touch and gently press the swollen area with your fingers, and stop there to heal the patient's affliction in that place.
He should be placed on his back on the bed where he sleeps, until he is healthy.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Some vertebral fractures are hidden, and it is necessary to adjust them carefully, and similarly the vertebrae of the back. And when you encounter some of these cases and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: because sometimes the most swollen and stupefied and deadened limbs cannot be moved or extended or strengthened, and when they are constricted, they have numbness or piercing pain, then you know that they are not healed, and in these conditions it is mortal.
And if you find that they are numb and feel constricted in the fingers and punctured, then you know that the core of the bone is saved and that the patient's wounds will be cured.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Then if you see that they are already paralyzed, it means that what happened in the marrow has occurred, and then when you sit on their back, there is evacuation and egestion according to their will, and some hidden things are placed on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not struggle in their cure.
But if you do not encounter any of these causes, the cause is worse and more obscure.
And the cure of it is that you perform a sedation on the abscessed vertebrae with a hot iron sole, or with mugwort steam; pause on that day until the abscessed vertebrae are sedated.
And then pause with one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and strengthen around that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if you encounter the separation of the vertebrae or some cause that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to sew up the wound and to adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then cure that encarnated wound of the joints, until it is healed.
But if the vertebrae of the spine are broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you introduce the finger of your left hand into the anus, and that you adjust the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible for second alignment; and then pause on the plaster and staple, if you need those, and then strengthen it.
And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then you feel on that, and remove it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrowness (or stricture).
The bones of the narrownesses are easily broken, and if they break, then the fracture of theirs is not only communication in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the affected parts; and it encounters the patient's pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stupefied when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is on the fracture which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it alone, then you adjust it according to what appears to you as possible for equal adjustment until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the loin or already declines to the lower parts, then you make the patient sit on their back ventre until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have adjusted it, pause on the plaster, and then pause on that staple of wood or of bone, and strengthen by stricture over which there is no fear of puncture of fracture nor movement of the staple.
And adjust the concavity to that which fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if you encounter an abscessed vertebrae, then cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscessed vertebrae is sedated, and pause on that which sits according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as it is necessary.
And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjutator (or helper).
The adjutator is that which is between the rib and the head of the shoulder.
If it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which you take first as a thick plaster according to this method:
And you will find them in two extreme ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then you will place the broken arm straight over the inner hollow of the thigh, until it reaches the knuckle of their hand in the same location where the curvature of the thigh is attached.
And then suspend it above some heavy cause, or the master extends that to the divided parts below; and then the doctor will know that the fracture is in the most sensitive places, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back and suspended by the hand from the neck, and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in their hands; and the other holds the pus below them; and almost all of them extend to their divided part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you stretch over the fracture in one ligament and over that in another ligament, and almost all of the two ministers extend to their two divided parts.
And then if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it happens that half of the ligament is placed over the knuckle and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it happens that the ligament is placed over that place and over that elbow.
That will facilitate and ease the treatment, and then it will be applied according to what happens and is applied for good application, then stretch that if you do not encounter any opposing abscess.
But if you encounter opposing abscess, then loosen the structure until the seventh day, and pause on the lane of the wounded skin in seven agreements and oils rosated until the abscess settles, and then you stretch that.
And the manner of stretching that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then you pause enveloping with new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjuster, and place your hand opened over the thigh muscle.
And pause the cloth and stretch over the adjuster the arm so that the arm is in a stable place, if it doesn't prohibit anything from some cause of the broken bone.
And then use stabilizers.
And it is that you place over the fracture that stabilizer which is more laden and stronger than the other stabilizers; and pause between each stabilizer the width of the finger, and let the length of the stabilizers be according to the fracture in addition to three fingers of the entire part.
And then stretch over the stabilizers with the structure which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture should be more straight. And when the fracture has been well-aligned, the structure will be smaller.
And then if you observe the situation of the stabilizers and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its usual situation, then you do it.
And if you fear opposing abscess, then loosen the structure and stabilizers until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it doesn't become inflamed or swollen in the place of pruning or inflammation; or it is prohibited to let the food reach the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's rest be on their back, and their most sensitive places be above the stomach.
And pause on the adjuster full of woolen wrapping, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify all with your virtue.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then it happens that you increase the food of them.
Since the custom of the adjuster and of their leg is that they are strengthened in 40 days; and then it happens that they are loosened and administered baths and medicated with ointments which rectify those.
And if the fracture is badly treated, then you do not loosen that ligament and stabilizers until a month or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm-bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius bone, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
And if you have broken the larger or smaller fontanelle, or if you have broken it in several places.
When the small fontanelle is broken below, then its restoration is more difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
And when the fontanelle of the patient's thigh is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fontanelle below, then it is convenient for the doctor to delay its restoration, so that a small extension can be facilitated until it is fully healed.
But if the large fontanelle is what is broken, then it is necessary to apply a more violent extension.
And if both fontanelles are broken at the same time, then it is necessary that you make the extraction even stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand conform to the restoration of it and the extended extension over a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be at the upper parts below, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the malady be seated on an inclined chair.
And let there be a cushion underneath it in its elevation or declivity, so that the malady does not encounter trouble.
And then extend the minister's arm from the upper part downwards to the right hand or left, and another minister extends similarly from above.
And then the doctor heals the bone until it returns to its best shape that it can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you will perforate all the flesh in the right place with your virtue.
And if it appears that the splinter is separated and you hold the codeine and it is not in your expectation for its restoration, then you finish over it and remove it according to the manner which we have described above.
But if the fracture is in a plague, you have already done this at that singular chapter, and therefore take the care of it.
And if you find an aposteme at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and be more subtle between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it in strict structure until the aposteme is calmed; and then remove the cerate and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of mulberry on clay of hooves, and then apply steel; and let the steel be that which is applied over that fracture firmly and strongly.
And you will know that the name of the steels of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one fontanelle or in two fontanelles at the same time.
And then apply your structure over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it will be the extraction to the upper parts above the fracture or to the lower parts below it, apply the structure a little more slowly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be very humid, and not dry nor rough, and the thread with which it is stretched should be of its own proper middle ground between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament to be at rest for some days. And if you find some cause for which correction is necessary, as we previously mentioned what happens to the limb, and then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the correction ceases.
And leave the limb not constricted until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the extraction is already mollified and the bone is already reformed and resembles those, then correct all that with your virtue.
And consider that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you mollify it a little and leave it for some days until it runs towards the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the malady does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around those.
And then the hand of the malady is suspended by its virtue of agitated movements, and make it sleep on its two sides.
And you will know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or if it is strongly restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the phalanges of the hand and fingers.
You will know that in the phalanges of the hand and fingers, there are often fractures, and they do not reach their place unless with very gentle and well-guided movements.
And when it reaches the hand fracture or attrition, then it is necessary that the malady follows an inclined path and descends from above according to equality, and then place the hand of it on that extension.
And then extend the minister outward to stretch out the bent bones in the ankle joint, so that they may be well-contracted and aligned.
Then cover the area with a plaster and stopper, if there is no abscessed aposteme to be cauterized; and then apply a star-shaped dressing underneath according to the size of the area, and you have already enveloped it in a cloth of linen.
Perhaps the binding is in the divisions of the fingers of the palm, and then it seems like a bandage of cloth, and command the patient to stretch that with their bound palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
And there is the star-shaped dressing on the heart in the cloth where it is elevated, so that the body can be applied to the palm; and stretch that according to how much it covers.
Perhaps the fracture is in the divisions of the forearm, then cover that with a star-shaped dressing underneath and another on the divided part below in the palm, so that the hand can be elevated and straightened; and then apply the splint, thus as the hand is revolved back into its proper alignment between the fingers and the wrist.
And if the fracture is in the knuckle of the fingers, then if it is a fingerless hand, it will be aligned according to how much it covers and then strengthened in the palm and if you want, place a small straight splint per so that the fracture is elevated and not misplaced.
Perhaps the fracture is in other fingers, thus as in that of the middle location, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, then it will be aligned and bound to the finger itself; or all the bindings will continue according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star-shaped dressing, thus as we have said about the fingers.
And consider, in your restoration, and then apply that, the disposition of abscessed aposteme to be cauterized and opposed — in the entire operation — to what covers when there is some cause among those, according to how the narration of it is iterated.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the bone in the thigh.
The bones of the hip joint, which are very fragile, are broken and declared according to the sensation, as they are converted into the division above and the pus that is below.
And the restoration of it is done thus, that one bandage is strengthened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their back and on their face.
And then extend the minister to stretch out the entire bandage to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
Perhaps it is proper to reach the root of the hip joint, then the bandage will be placed from above to the part of the perineum, so that the extension takes hold in them, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is proper to above, then make the bandage from above, and let the extension be to the parts below.
And then the ankle joint aligns the bone in both its natural positions into which it reduces according to the natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then cover that with a plaster and splint, if there is no abscessed aposteme in the member. Perhaps if there is an abscess in the aposteme, then leave it alone for some days until the cauterized abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
The splinting of it should be done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg so that it reaches to the ankle and the root of the hip joint.
And insert a long fillet between the hip joint and the leg proper from above to the parts below, and wrap the extremities of the fillet around the part just below the two joints, and then revolve over the leg and hip joint what is superfluous of the bandage.
And then place above the hip joint in the location of that fracture thus, and place one star-shaped dressing over the bone of the leg.
And then fill in the voids between the leg and the hip joint with many cloths, so that the structure is consolidated.
And then begin with a strong splinting from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have thus bound the location of the fracture with a bandage, your splinting will be less and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two extremities of the fillet to the parts below until they reach the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped dressings on the other part so that the bandage is not removed from its proper location.
And then leave the structure over that, so that it does not reach the corroding member nor cauterized aposteme nor inflammation and seems similar to those; and if there is some cause among those, then cut away from the dislocation of it, and rectify what reaches all around, according to how we have said many times before.
If the bone is affected by the weight of the bone itself, then take care to unload it according to what is possible for you; and if not, place something underneath it and remove that which has preceded the memory of the pain.
Some weakened veins are strengthened by this fracture of the thigh or other joints that are adjusted to them, thus we have said in the adjunct and in the arm.
Perhaps in the restoration of it, in such a way that no accidents occur to the patient's crippled condition; and if it is restored alone, or another joint that should be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that the crippled one be tested at all times.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade of the hand.
You know that a fracture of the shoulder blade of the hand is difficult to heal, and more accidents occur to the weakened muscles and tendons.
If it occurs to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a wound or several wounds, and about that all this has been stated according to the opinion.
And the restoration of it is also that which is reunited, that which has been broken off from its parts, with the digits put together so that it can be added and conjoined as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
And then pause with the plaster and place it on that round stool, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure according to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus as it is postulated with caution and similarity to those in which they oppose all accidents in what is convenient for the patient's health.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and is named fibula.
And it occurs to certain species of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm union, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, you will find those symptoms, and it is from those causes that are not easily diminished.
And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligamentation of the muscles according to that union.
Perhaps it is better, if the fracture of the leg has many weakened muscles, that the extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will help your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you unite the bones and complete all the time of operation, then you will take steps to straighten the foot from the place where the causes that were paused in solitude, and so you will make an examination of the branches of the palm; likewise from those to which there is small gout, and not be one of the manual ones, and it should be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the hand up to the foot.
And then envelop it with a certain cloth in two envelopments according to the length of it, and place one on the part of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and so from the hand up to the base of the foot.
And then bind the two bones in three places of the extremities and at the middle place, because in this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left parts, and it will be in good station.
And now administer a wooden board according to the length of the leg; and it should be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
And it is better that you do this in fracture, and when you have that wound properly.
And then consider in each day the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard yourself from postulation and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, then pause and apply to the patient what is good for their health.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not suffer a complete fracture; however, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and they do not occur to them except with great violence in the midst of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot undergo fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient pauses their foot on the prepared earth thus as a support.
And then stop the one foot above that which is elevated by those bones, and then tighten them, and press, and bend them inward so they return to their places.
And then apply an plaster and stop it from below, and place the belly of the foot on a small table to which two wooden legs are attached.
And then strengthen that part of the foot in its natural structure, since you have enveloped it with cloths and other causes of which they are worthy.
And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the bandage, because you will find the bones set, or reunited, or relocated, and the operation on those is thus successfully concluded.
Maybe some of these are reunited, then restore them, and bind them thus as you are and reassemble the fingers of the hand. And then stop the reunited finger in its natural length, and let it be slightly bent; and then place the foot on this table which you have recomended, and strengthen that part of the foot in its natural structure.
Maybe that which is reunited by the bones is two or three or more, then you stop on each finger in its natural quantity enveloped in a lion's cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table for the belly of the foot to have good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and stop yourself from every accident that may occur.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of the knee of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the wound of the man.
When the knee of the woman is broken, then make that cease in that wounded place, and then bend it towards the division of the two in a small way, and let it be held from behind.
And then the nurse will hold the knee together, and make it like her own knee; and then the woman will be comforted, and lift the back of her little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is before the division of the knee like her own and the broken bone returns.
And then apply poultices on the back of her, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cot with facility and apply urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
And do thus for seven days or around them, because that is restored.
And if you wish, take an egg of ostrich and strengthen over the thigh of her a tube of cane; and insert the whole bladder into her knee, and then blow into the tube with great virtue until the bladder is inflated inside the knee, because the fracture returns.
And then it will be filled with cot and stand for some days according to what we have recommended, until she is healthy.
And when the bone of the thigh of man or woman is broken, then minister in the restoration and healing of it according to what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is direct is not hidden in these nearby fractures, and little happens, mainly to those who have some study and use and understand my free book; because this fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore I finish.
Maybe in the wound of the man when it is broken, take a piece of elm tree, and put the wound in that; and then stop over it with an enveloping cloth, and let it be enveloped, and then let it be laid down for three days or around them, and let it be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded by a blow.
It is convenient for those who suffer from fracture by a blow, and mainly if the bone is large like the bone of the hip or of the adjuster, or similar to that, that you take care and make flexible as much as possible, so the conditions of flexibility testify to you or demonstrate thus as we have said before.
And if the blow flows with blood, then it is necessary that you take care of retention of it in such a way that you sprinkle over the injured place, if there is no other cause present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if there is no abscess.
Maybe if there is abscess caution, then you delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Maybe if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered codena, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce that and bind it with your most facilitating and least extended extensions.
Mostly if you don't extend it to you prepared and the equality of the arm in the muscles more, then you return that arm to its joint; and it is a straight instrument, the length of which is seven or eight inches and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four or three according to the quantity that indicates to him in the cure of all kinds of fracture.
And it should be rounded, and it should be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over itself during the operation hour.
And it should be of acute extremity where the margin is in the six extremities; and it should be the underside of it with a large tendon stretching, and from its middle to the divided parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small blade.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevated edge be raised above the prominent bone extremity.
And push it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it should be inserted into some equality of joint.
And then it is necessary to insert the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and does not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot return the bone to its entirety as we have recommended, then insert it in that part which is most convenient for the incisions, or it will be one of the saws in some manner possible for you.
And then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and of small, delicate scars.
And when the bone is returned, and then you reduce the pain of the violent throbbing, then you will know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer with the patient for great comfort.
When you have completed your restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in six stipatic black draps, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause on the cerous plague or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer staples at the hour of the completion of the bone restoration, and uncover the plague in this way that you insert the tube with forceps and uses of envelopments according to the quantity of the plague.
And beware that you do not strengthen the plague in the fracture, because many times it happens that foolish doctors make them, and they cause to occur on the wounded limbs mortal or corroding wounds, thus it is sanity. And if the structure of the limb relaxes, softens, differs from the structure of the other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad wound, and you fear about those evil accidents worse than those which we have recommended, and it throbs with pain in the place, then it does not matter that you pause on those staples, but rather do according to that envelopment of hard draps in place of staples and strengthen them.
And when one or two days have passed since the plague began to form a crust, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed on it six times, and administer heat, injecting those of our custom that we medicate the plagues, thus as we inject tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction of the bone is facilitated from the parts below.
If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the crust, then you will know that here are signs of small ulcers because it is necessary to inquire into the plague in a tentative manner. And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that from them are not separated and put the member in pain, therefore it is necessary to insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if you hasten to the plague with suction or evacuation, it is stimulations, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you pause at one of those which is convenient for him in the cure of which there is a preceding narration in the seventh chapter.
And of that which is necessary to state my best sermon and you make present your effort: when the bone is well-trimmed, it shines upon the member just as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction from it because many times it hastens for that death; having thus until you purify, because strong will be your fall if you prepare for 20 days or XXX. And when you treat the wound if you have seen it, and if it does not heal, then.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Soft tissues are affected by this swelling in the vicinity of a fracture's healing, and especially since it is close to the joints, and it is obstructed by the shape of the limb; and it strongly prohibits the limb from its natural operation.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipated thus, such as aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; in this way you take some or all of them, and mix them together so they are stipated, or with album of water, or with vi aggre, and apply it on the swelling in a stop, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
And let it remain undisturbed for several days; and then dissolve it and apply another, until the swelling is reduced; or stretch over that layer of lead decently, because lead has the property of reducing all that which is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a stone and is hardened, it is necessary to provoke an abscess there, and then divide it through the upper part of the limb, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or cut away that with some resolve until it is reduced; and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returned to its subtle and free natural movement.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returned to its subtle and free natural movement, it is not done so except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solutions of the ligament and of the bonding that does not cover according to its nature; or due to superfluous strictness of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to a multitude of excessive embrocations; or due to superfluous movement not at its proper time; or due to scarcity of blood in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
And the treatment of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and apply gauge and bandages over them.
And then apply a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues to embrocate it with water and tepid warmth, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored twistedly and prohibit the operation of their own which is natural.
When it happens to the limb already restored, then healing occurs from twistedness and eminence to the broken bone and swelling, and it is because of the faulty formation of the limb, but meanwhile the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then it does not occur that you receive the word of him who existed before that limb was newly broken.
But already many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very detestable, producing great fear in the sign of which is mortality.
But if the paralysis and swelling are recent, then it happens that they are embrocated with warm water in which they gather softening herbs, such as those of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and be made into an emplaster with mollifying emplastering thus, as well as dyallaquilon is well made; or that a mucilage of root of altea is taken and is mixed with gray gauze or oil of cypress, and is emplastered thereon; or that fat figs are applied and are bandaged on the columns of the limbs, and similar to those of the medicines which are named as permanent consolidation.
And some vertebrates are dissolved in steady friction of the ligature which is in the most humid places, and movement of the limb is administered at all hours to all parts.
But if the twistedness has already gone deep and is hardened and converted into a stone and provoked necessity for treatment with iron, then it happens that the pus is cleansed from above and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised so that superfluous swelling of that metacarpal is cut away with subtle incisions, and facilitated administration is made in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On the sermon on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from their natural place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is altered, and brings great pains and serious lesions to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostematous and strongly inflamed, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And if you do not cover yourself so that you are not touched or stood upon at the time of the disease, because many weakened muscles come to bring about spasms and pains.
Maybe when it happens, then cover yourself with the flannel of the patient, and place it under so that you can restore the disease; and place the member in warm water and oil, and then reduce it to make it more comfortable.
And every member is treated with water of which the memory will return to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body then descending to the lower part.
Chapter 23.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So the two lower jawbones are dislocated if they do not align; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and so slightly mollified; or they are fully dislocated and completed, until they are mollified at the joint area, so that saliva flows from the patient and cannot hold it nor close their mouth, and their tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Maybe when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major arrangements it returns to itself for a slight cause.
Maybe if the dislocation is full and complete, then cover that a reduction of it should be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should hold the head of the patient, and in the meantime the doctor puts his fingers on one side in the hollow of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he puts both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are placed beneath them to hold them steady; and he commands the patient to release their jaws and free themselves from any part; and the doctor holds the jaw and pushes it back into place until it returns to its proper location.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and even more so if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made easier and does not delay the reduction of both completely, thus as we have said.
And then when they return and are in their place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not mollified, then put a poultice of warm cerate on it, and make it with wax and oil rosated; and place it to facilitate the most comfortable positioning.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head should be steady between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything strong; having taken a gentle diet, forbidden to eat lion, until when the pains are removed and the jaws are numb, then they can have what they want.
And let this be administered easily, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth unless eating and drinking and citation, until the jaw is numb and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any hour and do not convert to their proper places, then many weakened muscles happen suddenly with fever and constant sweat, and the strength is altered in the patient's stomach, and the strength and vomits pure cholera.
And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many weakened muscles die to the one who suddenly happens this in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from the foot beneath due to its continuity with the foot; and some weakened muscles are dislocated to the front part, and that is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it will return.
And then put a poultice on that emplaster and apply powders to strengthen it.
Maybe the extremity of the one who is wounded and is continuous with it, is not dislocated on any day; then cover that it should be reduced and reset according to what we have said and according to your preparation.
And then put a poultice on that emplaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And in this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
And the second is that it should be displaced at the top of the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not displaced at the back parts for the sake of the shoulder; and it is not displaced at the front parts because of the nerves.
It is mainly displaced and beforehand examined at the lower parts of the little finger, and it is mainly in those where the flesh is scarce, it is lightly displaced; but in those where the flesh is abundant, it is examined with difficulty.
And strong percussion accidents occur at some homes unexpectedly, and the patient's muscle is inflamed with a hot apostem, and it is touched for that which has already been displaced.
Then take care that you press inside what is above the patient's body, and then proceed with their cure.
And it is recognized the dislocation of the patient when it is at the lower parts of the little finger; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the little finger's joint, just as if an egg, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its natural position, nor can they do it with every movement.
If it is displaced from the foot or ankle, and then you find a clear joint, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the doctor raises the patient's hand to the upper parts; and then places the fingers under the little finger, and raises the joint with strength in its natural place, and the doctor raises the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then pauses it below so that it returns gently.
But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then take care that the patient be bathed in warm water and be given an embrocation that softens and loosens, just as if it were a counter-irritant of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient is placed supine on their back and is paused below the little finger, waiting for it to be situated between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor places the talon on the spine, and raises the head of the muscle with a vertebra, and releases the patient's hand so that it is not bent at the lower parts, and another doctor holds the head of the patient, so that it is not bent at the lower parts, because then it will return to its natural place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make an effort to present a home where the patient is placed longer than usual, and it is on the side of the latz, and insert the natural muscle below the little finger of the patient and raise the little finger to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another doctor pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of their belly. But if the patient is weak, then take care that I have another cause suspended, so that you alleviate that, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced in this way: and it is fixed on the ground a long wooden beam of which the head is rounded in shape, just like a mortar's pestle, that is neither large nor subtle, and then placed below the patient; because when placed above the head of the beam, the drapes lean on it, and the patient is standing according to the length of the beam, and then extended the hand to the lower parts of the other side; and the body is extended from the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its natural place with velocity.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a beam of the quantity of which the length is two arms, and the width of that is four fingers, and the thickness of it is adjusted on the thumb's joint according to this form:
And then place on the rounded head some light drapes so that the beam does not harm the patient.
And then place below the little finger of the patient, and extend the hand or arm over the beam until the lower parts, and tie the beam to the adjacent area and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a scale of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters soon.
And when the instrument of it is complete according to whatever manner that is possible for you, and then take care that you place below the little finger of the spine in a quantity of equal amount; and then prepare an emplaster made from powder of molybdenum and egg white on all the muscles, just as if it were revolved above, and then strengthen below the little finger with decent stricture; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the patient's hand is attached to their neck, and it is released, and the patient's hand should not be bent for seven days.
It seems that I should be healing the patient's food a little, until the member is comforted, because it is more pleasing to their health.
And the food should be given more frequently or it is exercised with a movement; and thus if it is strengthened and not made soft, then it is already healed.
Maybe if the joint is dislocated often due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary that in that case a cautery be administered in three tracts, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and structure are reduced on some affected areas, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to those parts above, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already inflamed or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint at no time will be fixed in its proper place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the chest and the shoulder or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension on the hands, until it returns.
And another structure should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it affects the healing of the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many affected areas until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden because you fall under the weight or under the touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, that is clearly declared, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the surrounding muscle.
And it is necessary that the hips be reduced, and the dislocation is reduced as soon as possible before it comes to a chronic apostema, because if it comes to a chronic apostema, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly is it healed entirely; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many affected areas are dying from that mortally.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand should be extended with two hands, and its arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are placed over the hip and below it, and the fingers of its own hands envelop the joint, or at the base of its palm until it returns to its place.
Maybe if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that it bends the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and very strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same position with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then it should be revolved in all parts, because it is enveloped with a double layer of cloth over its hand, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until that oil is applied for it to be those causes that help in lubricating the joint and facilitating; and then he envelops the joint with a vigorous push until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that plaster in which it is stipulated and excruciated with album of egg white, and it is extended in a descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then it is dissolved; and thus if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you dissolve the ligament of it and leave it like that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you iterate the plaster and ligament, and leave it like that for several days until it is extended; and then dissolve it.
Maybe if it affects the gravity towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in many ways and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause on the alleviated joint, so it is massaged with gentle motion; and then it is bound, and leave it like that on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and place it in many ways; and when it dries, then you scrub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over that alleviated one, so it is rounded with gentle motion, once, and the second, and the third. in an instrument of many ways, until it is smooth.
And if you want to, stop above that humid and scalded wound with a bandage and tighten it strongly over that; and make some evacuations, because that is humid and returns to its disposition.
Chapter 28.
About the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Shoulder dislocation of the hand sometimes happens, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and on the contrary it is more difficult than other joints, but above all it is necessary that there be velocity in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, provided that the place is well prepared or that it does not become inflamed afterwards.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the doctor extends their hand from that, and the doctor places their hand or their palm near the joint, and presses it inwards until it returns to its proper place.
Moreover, it is necessary that it be considered if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places their back against a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is above the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that person should be inwardly bent over the table, so that the doctor's hand can grasp it near the joint.
And then if it returns quickly, that's good; and if not, then strengthen that bandage immediately to prevent inflammation and let it be; and do not touch it, because if not, you will not suffer nor will you be able to put your hand on the reduction of it until several days pass.
Moreover, the Roman joint is according to its twistedness; and do not notice any cause in the patient, but rather that the hand is weakened and cannot hold anything; then you know that the nerves are numb or paralyzed, and then it is not possible to put anything on it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the treatment of it and to fortify its strength.
Then when the shoulder is returned, then stop above the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be strengthened and tightened for five days; and then it should be loosened and let go, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
Moreover, if the movement of it is painful and causes discomfort in some part, then apply a warm compress and make some evacuations, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
About the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Some evacuations are necessary to completely dislocate the toes.
And when a toe is dislocated from its place on the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then hold the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its proper place on that day.
And when it is night, bind it according to the narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise its movement, and bind it at night; and do this for some days until it is strong.
And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and do this first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter 30.
About the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens that one of the vertebrae of the back or neck is completely dislocated, and several vertebrae are moved from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death awaits the patient.
And it is evident that the effort of the patient is beyond their strength, and they cannot retain it; and many evacuations are needed to weaken some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is moved from its place, because many evacuations are necessary to move it and many evacuations are made for the movement of that in four parts.
Then that is moved to the back parts and is called luxation.
Moreover, the treatment of it is that then you consider if the luxation occurs from weakness, because then in that case there is no cure nor healing at all.
Moreover, in that which is seen through experimentation or percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients revealed the methods of treatment in a verbose sermon, from which the most returns to profit; but you have already abbreviated it from that from which I have little excuse for the trope of it, by my own proximity to the intention of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed various instruments of that, with which I will show this and expand on it.
And of those it is not cured unless it occurs on the back properly, where I recommend it.
It is that the patient should be extended on their face over a soft mattress near a wall, and should be extended with a moderate straightening so that the chest of the patient is not hindered.
And place a straight stick, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around the patient's head, and another stick in the air holding the feet of the patient on the other side of the bed.
The minister holds the stick, and it is not fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that same form.
And wrap a bandage around the patient's head and tighten the small ligatures firmly; and extend the extremity of the ligature to the stick which holds the patient's head, and tie it there; and place the other ligature on their hips, at the groins of the patient, and tie the legs of the patient; and adjust all the ligatures and tie them to the other stick which holds the patient's feet.
And the minister should carefully extend the ligature to the partition of the stick, and do not remove the two sticks and the ligatures from their proper places where they are fixed, but rather leave them firm as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine for strengthening until it returns, or places them on that one table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
But if it does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air three hand-breadths, and dig into the wall where we have said that it is near the patient a place where the extremity of the table enters. And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor places their feet on the other extremity, and stretch it well until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, take a turn which has been turned around in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground near the patient's head at the back of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and near the patient's head at the back of the bed again two sticks; and let the length be between each stick a palm, and already it has been done in each stick through which the turn is made, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it is not moved.
And let there be a round stick in which the turn is made, and let it be turned around in the two tracks of the two sticks.
And at the extremity of it there is a track in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is turned around; and in the two other sticks it is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligatures that have been stretched on the chest of the patient in the stick which holds the head of the patient, and the ligatures that have been stretched on their thighs in the turn which holds their feet.
And then there is a turn and a minister who holds the turn with their hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
And then because the spine has returned, and the place is straightened, then it is necessary to apply a plaster cast of egg white on the affected area, and then stop; and then place on the cast a flat surface of a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gibosity, and on the partition of the spine thus.
And then let it be tied with the ligature which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nutrition until they are healthy.
And if there remains any inflammation at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines which mollify and soothe be administered on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a layer of lead.
And some weakened points occur in the back of the spine of the two, and it is customary for that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been injured so that it does not happen to be made worse by this medicine, because it will make your condition worse, and you will accelerate death.
Chapter 21.
On the Cure of a Dislocated Hip.
You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not come together unless there is dislocation only, and it does not occur to those which occur in the other small joints with movement and curvature.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the forward parts, or to the inward parts, or to the backward parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the inward parts or to the backward parts.
For the indication of dislocation from the parts that are fourth, when you adjust the leg of the healthy thigh to the unhealthy one, it is more lengthy and more evident than the healthy one, and the unhealthy leg cannot double its step because of the tongue-like apostema, and it is the place where the tongue-like apostema is cauterized with a hot iron, so that the end of the thigh is already pervaded here.
The sign of that which falls into dislocation is in the forefront parts, it is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of that which falls into dislocation in the anterior parts is because the leg is expanded according to its compliment, but meanwhile it does not double that step because of the pain that is in the tongue-like part, and if it is perforated to walk and cannot stand on that, the urine of it is retained and the knee of it is apostematous, and the walking of it is upon the ankle.
The sign of that which falls into dislocation in the posterior parts is that it does not expand the tongue-like part, nor can it double that step which doubles the knee, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the knee is mollified, and the end of the thigh is at that place.
The reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been anticipated with that which you have administered reduction to it and arranged according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore there cannot be a postponement of the process.
Moreover in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should hurry to restore the joint and extend it to the posterior and anterior parts, and likewise to the right and left, because strongly it returns and does not indicate another cure.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the part below, or with its own hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the tongue-like part; and another minister extends the hand of that which is above, so that it touches the lower parts with its fingers; and you hold strongly on the edge of the thigh, and have another minister who stretches the extremity of the edge.
And it is an extension of it or from the posterior part to the angle at the part of the hip, or from the posterior part to the part of the back.
And it is the extension of all those in one go, until the patient is elevated above the ground and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that which we spoke of in terms of its own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the posterior parts, it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on the ground beside; and then pause the edges on the edge of the thigh at that place which is between the end of the thigh and the place below the knee; and then extend the edge from the part of the angle to the further back part of the hip.
And then another strong minister takes the arms of it, and holds the large place of the unhealthy thigh and extends to the anterior parts for violent extension, because that returns to its original place.
And this species is of the easiest cure in which this member is reduced more than the other species.
Moreover if it is excused from you and does not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then it is necessary that the two feet of the unhealthy person be tied together strongly, lightly, above both ankles and both tongue-like parts.
And it is the length of each one of its part by the quantity of four fingers, and it is the unhealthy leg extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the unhealthy person is suspended above the top of the beam, and it is in the harness; and it is the length of it from the ground a quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to move the end of the thigh, and it is suspended with the unhealthy person another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh strongly in an empirical manner, because the joint returns to its original place with velocity.
Moreover in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the anterior part, it is necessary that the unhealthy person lies on a pillow according to what we have recommended in the preceding chapter; and it is strengthened the edge over the unhealthy leg properly and over its foot.
And then two beams are placed, one at the foot of it, and the other at the end; and then two adjusted beams are placed on the middle of the joint fixed above which the humid towels are enveloped, so that the unhealthy person is not damaged because the beam is between the thighs of it, so that the extension to the lower parts is not attracted.
And each minister extends to their part, and the doctor puts their hand in the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this narrative method about pus; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the loin of the patient, and then touches with the other hand, and in this way stops the extension to the anterior parts below the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the anterior parts below, and it is elevated above the earth; having been placed on a hard surface, thus as we have said, if the joint of the patient is dislocated to the anterior parts, according to what we have said about the alignment of the patient on two stools; and it is above their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
And it is necessary that compression be administered on the table above the area where the joint is.
Then, since the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient's leg expands and excuses, then you know that the limb is returned as it should be — and then you adjust both hips and place a bandage and extend to the bend so that the joint is not moved in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those joints in agreement, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply it, and extend it according to your primary structure, and let it be for three days.
And then release it, and make it delay in walking about for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the cure of dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated to the anterior parts, and to the posterior parts, and sometimes below to the posterior parts; and to the anterior parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that it commands the patient to apply their leg to the hip; then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the ways of it is that you make the patient rise upright, so that they can extend their leg, if possible; place the two feet on the ground, and place their foot between the two feet; and then make them adhere to the knee with both palms, and hold those between the two fingers above the knee of the patient in fortitude, and another minister extends the aforementioned foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the hip with elevated laborlessness.
And then apply it and make the leg adhere to the hip, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for some days, until they are healed and comforted.
Maybe if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments of those in the cure of the preceding narration of the ankle.
Chapter 33.
On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Some ankles are removed by small movement, and some are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either in the posterior parts or in the anterior parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflating proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Maybe the cure of the movement of it is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitated hands and should be jointed until it returns.
Maybe in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to completeness, it is necessary that you make the patient rise upright, and hold that with one strong and valiant minister from the back part of the foot in its proper place.
And then you put your right hand on the foot above the ankle, and with your left hand below the foot at the place of the Achilles tendon.
And then you pull the foot to your right hand, and with your left hand for two movements, and then extend with your left hand; and you place the toes of the foot on the right side towards the leg, which is in trouble.
And it does good evacuated secretions according to what we have counted.
Then apply poultices to the foot at the third evacuated place, and you are at the small intestine.
So if it returns in one evacuation or in two according to this method, and if the foot is restored, it is good; and if not, then over it iterate the operation, because that returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with water that we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on a firm earth, and stretch out a bandage firmly around them, and enclose between their thighs, and you have already enveloped them in a sheet so that the patient does not escape.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a lien that lies on the ankle of the foot; and then extend that same minister against the extension of the back, and the bandage is extended between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient does not incline towards the parts below its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns to its proper facility.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the application and stretch out that bandage firmly, and bind the foot with a lien to the ankle.
And take care that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are located behind the ankle, so that the bandage on that does not become violent and holds it firmly.
And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch it out again.
And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if you are forced to go into that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not become dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive a cure.
And if you should happen upon an aposteme, then take care that you administer in the sedation of it with what precedes our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is remedied.
Chapter 34.
On the Cure of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be reduced with little extension of its effort; and that which is not difficult, therefore it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit with their foot on the ground or on a table, and it should be established thus as if they were going.
And then you stand by their feet, and place their foot on what appears to be the joints, and then calcify that in their foot towards the vertebra until it returns, and see that it is already reduced and does not appear at the eminent place.
And then place the belly of their foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then stretch it in a decent structure and hold it firm for three days; and then remove it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the Species of Dislocation that are Caused by a Blow or a Fracture or some other Accidents.
When you encounter any of those causes, and you are proficient in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many evacuated successes will follow, avoiding death.
And for that reason it is not necessary that on the cure of it you presume, but rather one who is wise in the art, from long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that cast out apostemes as much as possible, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, except for the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope. And then it is necessary to hasten as much as possible the reduction at the beginning of the cause, lest an aposteme should become entrenched.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that casts out an aposteme and cures the wound with what is convenient for it from the beginning of the desiccated injuries.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and you encounter separated bones in the sacrum, then you perform their statement, and do in that what we have said about simple maladies of that which precedes in those places.
And beware and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my prediction; for it is better for you to give glory to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body truly, those in your time. Thus the phrases of Albucasim are perfectly defined by those whom God has not blessed. Here is the next translation:
