Oh, sons, now I have completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, since its completion has brought it to an end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is my wish that you may learn from this treatise, which is a part of surgery, carried out by myself.
For the surgery done by me is spread out in our region and in our time, and it has been utterly privatized; so that the science of it is greatly endangered, and its practice is obstructed; and there remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered more and corrupted into those errors and mistakes, until the intentions of it are closed off and the force of it and the art are exhausted.
And it is clear to me that you must revitalize that ancient order of this treatise through the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work may be added to the declaration, and prepared for use, which necessity arises.
But the reason why a good craftsman cannot be found with his own hand in our present time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its actor to have been exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which was understood by Galen, so that he knows the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number and arrangement; and also of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their effusion.
And therefore says Hippocrates that a name is not enough, but rather in small work and most of all in the art of one's hand.
But we have already said this about him in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not well-versed in anatomy as we have described it, will not be spared from falling into error by which many men are killed, just as I have seen many of those who are thus formed in this science and take themselves out of that without science or experience.
For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had caused an abscess to form in the throat of a woman, and had cut some arteries in the throat so that a great deal of blood flowed, and as a result the woman died between them.
And you saw another doctor who ordered that a stone be removed from a man's bladder, which had progressed in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and removed that stone with a piece of his own intestines, so that that man died on the third day.
And you yourself had already appealed to remove it, and saw that due to the largeness of the stone and the condition of the patient, one could conclude above him that he would die.
And you saw another doctor who took payment from the duke of our land for surgery, and endeavored to set the fracture of a blacksmith's broken leg; but the doctor prepared it with his ignorance, removed the fracture above the wound with pulleys and astels with great tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then he loosened it according to his desires, and then relaxed the bandage, and then loosened it again after some days and commanded us to loosen the bond; and thus it was that the leg and foot became gangrened, and came to destruction.
And you were called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bond, and as a result he obtained relief and began to be freed from his pains.
But meanwhile corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the patient was in mortal danger.
And you saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and allowed it to ulcerate about three days later, until the great majesty of the disease overpowered his lordship.
Which is because the melancholic humor is pure in the cancerous person, whereas it does not need to be brought forth by iron, but rather to be present in a member that suffers from being completely possessed.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation done by me be divided into two parts: one is in the operation which is associated with health, and the other is in the work where there is danger to the greater dispositions.
And you have already existed in this place throughout this book where the operation is one of error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that foolish people do not get in the way of speaking and dishonestly besmirching your reputation.
And therefore, take up your own arms with solicitude and the protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best method through the grace of God to achieve salvation and glorious success, and overcome terrifying illnesses that are difficult to heal, and stand your ground with these arms that make you afraid, so that your position in your faith and in your name does not fail: for it is more remaining to your glory, and even more in this world and in the end to your sanctity.
Galen has said so in some of his own monodies: "'Do not heal bad illnesses, lest you be called a bad doctor'".
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and the first part of the first chapter. The first chapter, orderly arranged from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and iron tools for cauterization, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on cupping glasses, wounds, and extraction of splinters and similar things, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on curing of twists and similar things; chapter ordered from head to foot, and of the forms of instruments.
You must say what quality the joints of that cautery have, and what are its defects, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of cautery and its defects is a long and prolix one, subtle in science, and hidden in secret; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and to me it seems sufficient to present a small part of their sermons, fearing prolivity.
And therefore I say that cautery is suitable for all general conditions universally, which are in matter or of matter, except two conditions, which are hot humoral conditions.
In the hot and dry condition with matter, it dries out; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a hot and dry disease, with water that is hot and dry, should be cured.
And say that which says the opposite of this, that through cautery, the joint is made in all hot and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humors to the condition of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say by the sermon of that, that this experiment has already been discovered to me on several occasions.
But it is not necessary that this come to light again about what has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery, and to understand the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their respective members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of theirs, and the space of time for those.
But in other conditions, there is no fear for you, and most especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant about the joint of cautery in those.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness, it is clear that those who use cautery with medicine are in error, for fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized, not affecting another member connected to it except with slight harm.
But the action of medicine combined reaches that member which is distant from it, and easily brings disease to a difficult-to-cure member, and easily causes harm.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it superfluously adds. And already we have known through experiment and long service in studying the art, on the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. But if it were not for the fact that it is not read in a better book in this pause, to you, a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies, and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with a philosophical demonstration, which would be suitable for your souls.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at any time, for the damage caused by the accidental time is submerged in the joint of this which is attracted to the cautery, and most especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and violent, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those who come with malice, that is greater than a small harm entering through the time.
And thus it is not considered in your souls, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by anyone but the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is cured by cautery, there is no reduction at any time, and they pause at the consequences.
And the cause is not thus as they say for that reason, because cautery is nothing but in a place of medicine which alters the condition and dries up the humors which are the cause why pains come.
But in any case, cautery is excessive over medicine because of the desire for its virtue and worthiness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his disease will return at some hour of time, according to the condition of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what is obtained by him in his acquisition through foods and similar causes; except that the disease which is administered with cautery is a subtle disease in a few superfluities and humors, just like the cautery of the tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in him the pain will not return, but rather it will be reduced in smallness.
And besides, the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it's a dreadful remedy, not to what they understand in it, because I believe that there is no cure that benefits by medicine or any other cause, approaching to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine not at all when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and it approaches the end of the cause, then one administers cautery, and profits from it. And hours ago I said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand, and which the common people and foolish doctors also understand.
And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except by the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a difference, just as it is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and demonstrated that it does not do this except in some bodies or others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron just as they say; but however, when you do cautery with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the quantity that you want by the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it above it, ignition occurs, and case some layers form so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
And therefore, it is made to do cautery with iron in a way that is lighter and more proper for the rectitude of operation.
And I have arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those from head to foot, so that the one seeking it may easily find what they want.
The First Chapter.
This cauterization brings relief to the humidity and coldness on the service of the accident of which there are two causes: one cause is soda and multiplicity of fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the partitions of the eyes and ears that flow, and multiplicity of sleepiness, and toothache and gout, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, just as paralysis, stroke, and apoplexy, and similar diseases in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, I command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine in the head, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the patient and their age and habit requires.
And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that section sit between his own hands on a covered bench, and have him rest his hands on the stones.
And then pause the razor's stroke at the tip of your thumb, right above the nostrils between his own eyes. But when the above said location is reached, mark that location with a tent, and then light the cautery olive of which this is the form:
And then pause that [cautery] on the marked location with the tent, in such a way that it descends gradually, as your hand is constrained little by little, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see that some part of the skull has been uncovered, just like the amount of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to that iron [cautery], use another one, if it is chilled, until what I have told you is seen by the bone.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and let it stay for three days.
And then pause over it, covered with a cloth in the border and let it stay until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the location with four-part medicine until it is healed.
And they said that when the wound remains open, so much the better, it gets the balm, because it is more suitable and beneficial.
And some of them said that the tongue should be cauterized inside the bone, and kept there until some part of the specificity of the bone is absorbed.
And then it should be removed from that which has been absorbed by the bone, and then it should be cured.
And others said that with the cautery, it should be brought to the end, until it presses strongly on the bone, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alfalfa: and they think that from that location, the vapors of the head will be released.
And the open wound should be kept for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, it is not seen in these two species of cautery from all, except in some men according to the way of fear; and leaving that, I must say that it is better for health when it is so, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity like we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of fierce nature.
And the first species of cautery is more saved and better, it seems to me; and with that house and that work, there is health.
Second Chapter.
On Caustics for the Head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head in a patient who is prolonged in his malady, and uses of wars, warts, capillaries, poultices, emplasters, goutzes, cadels, and gualinas, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which relents and does not benefit the patient at all, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in his nature; and if it is not fierce and does not find great cold, then that other cauterizes another cauter, leaving a little bit. And then cauterize it on the crown of the patient's head with another cautery until the tongue is divided. Cut the tongue and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted, and cauterize it with one cautery in the back part of the head at the location called "vas", -- and that is the location where a ventose is placed. And lift your hand away from there, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will feel a great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it needs the cautery with which you cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Third Chapter.
On Caustics for Migraine Not of Ancient Origin.
When the patient has a headache in the back of the head, or it spreads to the eye, first purify the head with laxative medicines, and then administer the other cure which I have said in the divisions of diseases; and if none of these helps, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with acute medicine combined, or with iron.
But the cauterization with combined medicine is when you take a small amount of aloes, and extract it and cut off the extremities of both ends. And then cut the location of the pain in the temple with a well-sharpened knife until a small opening is made, leaving the tongue to be hidden.
And then strengthen it with a stopper pressed down by gradual constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the aloes, and let the wound stay for two or three days, and then pause over it covered with a cloth until the location makes an opening.
And then cure that with four-part medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines which I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
But the cauterization with iron, according to this method: ignite for the purpose of which this is the form:
and is called "claw of nails", because the head of it is like a form of claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
And then pause on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the iron is not absorbed into the bone which remains - and slowly turn the small iron with velocity.
And if the quantity of bone that is absorbed by the specificity of the tongue is like the majority of bone, and raise your hand for this reason, so that the artery which remains is not absorbed, so that there may not be a flow of blood.
And then soak the cloth in saltwater and pause it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then remove the cloth with a border, and cure with four-part medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize at the tip of the knife according to the caustic, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-ancient migrainous pain.
Fourth Chapter.
On Caustics for Ancient Migraine.
When you cure migraine with what we have said about the previous cure and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not work and the disease is so severe that it does not reach the amount we have said for the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to ignite the knife cauter until it is whitened, since you signify on the location of the pain with a line of length which is the majority of the finger, or what is that; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen that until you cut into the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the jawbone, which is damaged by mastication, and that the ligament not be absorbed and the nerves that are affected by it, so that there is no spasming.
And if it is on the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is not studious and experienced; and leave the operation to begin.
And you will find in the remembrance of the regimen of blood flow accidental to the artery according to your method, in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not reach the cauterization and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head just as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with two cauters, and this is the better cauterization and more suitable.
Fifth Chapter.
On Caustics for Earaches.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cauterizer, and this is called "punctum", the form of which is:
And then make the punctum and approach the ignition, and be carried around the entire ear like a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in one. Hold the cauterizer at the root of the ear, little by little, until you have marked the location with intent.
And if the cauterizer touches all the points in the entire ear, and those ones, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Sixth Chapter.
On Caustics for Itching.
Itching which is cured and with cauterization is only of the species that comes from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species which occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of itching with ointments and poultices and gualguaries, and your cure does not relieve the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizers: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And pause your cauterizer on the contrary side of the affected part, because softening only appears on the part that seems to be healing.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterizer on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the crown of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's joint, and pause your hand with the cauterizer until the quantity of the majority of the bone's specificity is consumed.
And this is the form of the cauterizer, and it is a species of the knife cauter, the form of which is before us. But meanwhile, it is more subtle that you see only a little of what I have said; and it is necessary to cut away the excessive roughness in it a little.
And then cure the location with water as is before the process, until it is healed.
Seventh Chapter.
On Caustics for Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water which we have said and your medicine does not relieve the patient and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauterizers: on all the horns of his head; and with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with a cauterizer in the occiput. And the method of cauterization is done according to what was said above.
And already it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then be cured with water as proceeds.
Eighth Chapter.
On Caustics for Oblivion caused by Flux.
Make sure that the patient is given in the beginning large quantities of ointments and pills serving as purgatives.
And then shave the head of the patient and pause on the occiput of it an emplaster described in the treatise on emplasters.
And pause that for several days, because that is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to the order which I have said before.
And therefore if it is good for those who are healed by this; and otherwise, then make three cauterizers on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the uppermost part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cauterizer the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cauterizer with water as has been done.
But if you add more and the patient is so tolerant, then make a cauterizer in the middle part; and if you wish to add even more, then immediately cauterize that on both horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cauterizer olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Ninth Chapter.
On Caustics for Paralysis and Softening of the entire Body.
Make sure that you process in softening the head with ointments and water as we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and immediately cauterize it with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head, and with a cauterizer on all the horns of the head, and with a cauterizer on the posterior part of it, and with three cauterizers on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of many and the patients are tolerant and the disease is strong, then immediately cauterize that with four cauterizers on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards with a cauterizer until it is burned through to the bone marrow, and lift up your hand. And then cure that until it is healed, and this be an olive-shaped cauterizer.
Tenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Epilepsy.
It is not cauterized the epileptic, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
And therefore, make sure to soften the brain of the patient at the beginning with ointments and other cure which we have said in the division when the disease is great and the patient is tolerant except for medicines.
And if the child cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gualguaries and mastigatories which serve to soften, for several days, with good nourishment of food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and immediately cauterize it with one cauterizer in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and another cauterizer on the occiput, and on each horn of the head, cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then immediately cauterize that with cauterizers which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be the cauterizer olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cauterizer according to this method.
Eleventh Chapter.
On Caustics for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humidified, corrupted and fluxy in great abundance, then immediately cauterize that with the cauterizers which we have said in the preceding chapter.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him water that softens the brain of it according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a tortoise-shaped depression downwards from it on the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should be kept for six days, and be held from all parties.
And then pause with an ointment; and it is more worthy of an old ram's fleece. And heat that over the fire with gentle warmth by measure, which the said patient suffered when he was in it. And then put that in the middle part of the head of him in the circle, and leave it until it is warmed through.
And do this with the patient for one week at a time, with another regimen of good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to what is most of it, but so that you hold your hand with a cauterizer thus ordered: this is a species of cauterization which moistens the brain with equality.
And then pause that wrapped in a border or in gray gauze.
Twelfth Chapter.
On Caustics for Water Descending into the Eye.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the eye by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of it, and guard against all humidity.
And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head; and immediately cauterize that with two cauterizers on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into two eyes, or of one eye if it is the beginning of water descending into one eye.
Cut with a cauterizer all the veins and arteries that are left in the bone; and be the cauterizers in that long on the latitude of the temples.
And beware of blood flux when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flux from it, stop it with some medicine which is to your power.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those, and caution with regards to blood fluxes.
And some times it is cauterized in the cervical vertebrae left between two bones with two cauterizers produced afterwards.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Old Tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accumulated, and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the head outside, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluxy matter, then immediately cauterize that with a cauterizer which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes, and with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head and with two cauterizers in the cervical vertebrae left between two temples, and with two cauterizers in the cervical vertebrae left between two bones. And if you need addition, then immediately cauterize that on the entire breadth of the outer corner of the eye above the supercilium with a small cauterizer.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Bad Smell from the Nose.
When you treat that with water as we have said in the division and your treatment does not produce any benefit, then prepare and give to drink to the patient those cochias for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cauterizer and an olive-shaped cauterizer. And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cauterizer and two cauterizers on both superciliums, just below the hairline.
And beware of not cutting into the artery lest you hurt it.
And of the clove-shaped cauterizer, this is the form.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Softening of Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then immediately cauterize that eyelid with a cauterizer in this form:
And if you wish, cauterize that on both superciliums a little with two cauterizers in all parts, and be them stretched out to the temporal areas. And be the length of each cauterizer according to the quantity of supercilium.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is softened.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Eyelid of the Eye when the hairs are converted to the inner parts and punch the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the inner parts in such a way that they pierce the eye, cauterize them according to two methods: either by burning or by medicinal concoction.
If with a cauterizer of fire, command the patient before this that he shall look at his hairs in such a way as those which are softening, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you punch that, let him have their natural growth, then you strengthen the eyes of him with a bandage so that it may not be harmed until the hairs are born.
Then when they are born and equalized, pause the patient's head in your seat, and then signal on the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of mirta, and be the beginning of the sign close to the hairs.
And then wrap it in a cloth soaked with human urine or in mucus of papyrus on the eye.
And then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form:
And then cauterize on the figure which is signaled, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the bone which is like a leaf of mirta, is completely burned through, appearing properly.
And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it being lifted above the point of puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause on it with a cloth until the scar is raised. And then care for that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns to the hairs for their natural growth and the eyelid is softened, then immediately do another time the cauterization on that just as you did previously.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid left behind, then immediately cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
But the cauterizer with medicinal concoction is this: you command the patient to look at his hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a cloth of fabric in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take one ounce of known sulfur and one ounce of living vinegar. The end! And then take one ounce of known sulfur and one ounce of living vinegar. Mix those causes well, and make that with fasting so that it is not warmed; and then spread that water over the cloth which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that on one eye or both eyes; and pause afterwards the eye cloth wrapped in human urine, and the patient's head be in your seat.
And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press it a little and do not harm it until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for stinging is in it as if from fire.
And then when the patient perceives that he is feeling stinging, then immediately stop the medicine and wash it with your said water; therefore, when the stinging ceases, then again wash the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted as much as it was washed away by fire or incision, for then you are well; and if not, return to that same spot with the medicine where you did not apply the medicine before, and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
And then pause on it with a cloth wrapped in a border until the bone of adjustment is eradicated; and then care for that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to be diligent in your operation, watching carefully that the medicine does not fall into the eye; and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and some cause of the hairs pokes into the eye, then immediately repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and do exactly as you did at the beginning, and approach it until it is healed.
And this is the form of leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their greatness and smallness, and therefore according to that is made your contraction.
And let not the way of righteousness be hidden from him to whom this art is studied in this book.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Fistulas that are in the Lachrymal of the Eye.
When you cure a fistula with water as we have said in the divisions of diseases and it does not correspond to your treatment, then consider that you must cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to pause his head in your seat, and hold the head of him some minister between your thighs in such a way that he is not harmed nor agitated with his own head.
And then wrap it in a cloth soaked in human urine or in mucus of papyrus on the eye of him.
And then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form:
which is curved, like a shape of cane or of a vulture's beak, from one end where the cauterizer is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate to the other end. And if you wish, it should be taken out like a tent.
But in any case, the one that is curved is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and take out from it pus and dry up that one. And if it is not open, then immediately work on that and extract the discharge from it.
And then pause on it the cauterizer which is well ignited, and take with your hand a little of the cauterizer from the eye to the nose, so that you do not err or the patient becomes troubled, and then pause the cauterizer in the gray of the eye and corrupt that one.
And then if at the beginning of your cauterizer it enters into the bone, good is; and otherwise, immediately repeat the cauterizer one or two times, as needed; and leave that alone for three days, and then pause on that cloth wrapped in a border and surround it with an ointment to dry out until it is healed.
But if it is passed 11 days and it is not healed, then immediately pause on the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and shaved according to what is written in your own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier doctors also said: take the location of the fistula and fill it with it; and then pause in that fissure, subtle like this form: And pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a camal with good retention, and let not the patient be harmed because the melted lead does not reach the eye of that one; and it is necessary to pause on the patient's eye wrapped in human urine or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, good is; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a blow through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will come into its proper place.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Cleft of the Palate.
Many times accidentally split fissures occur in the lips, and most commonly in the lips of children.
Therefore, since you cure those fissures with the water that we have said in the divisions and it does not take effect, then ignite the small cauterizer of a knife-shaped form according to this manner:
And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a scalpel.
And then pause that instrument gently in those fissures until the cauterizer reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then care for that with a cerate until it is healed.
Nineteenth Chapter.
On Caustics for Fistulas in the Mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an apostema and it grows, and breaks forth, and becomes antiquated, and a fistula forms, and you cure that one and it does not take effect, then consider that you must ignite the cauterizer according to the quantity received in the fistula; and then put that ignited instrument into the track of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it make it thus one or two times; and then care for that with the water that we have said about treatment until it is healed.
And then if the pus is discharged and it is healed, good is; and otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and uncover the corrupted bone according to what is written in its chapter.
Twentieth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are harmed, and you cure those with medicines and they do not take effect, then pause the patient's head in your seat, and immediately ignite the cauterizer of which this form comes close to, so that you pause the quill on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cauterizer quickly, and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand, and immediately repeat the cauterizer several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient will rinse his mouth with saltwater and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop, because the harmed tooth is closed, and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Twenty-first Chapter.
On Caustics for Toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is frost or vermin in it, or the treatment with medicine does not take effect, then consider that cauterization in that case is according to two methods: either cauterization with a border of cow's milk, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder is that you take the border of cow's milk and boil it in a metal pot, then take a cloth and wrap it around the edge of the tent, and then immerse that boiled border in the cloth, and pause that on the painful tooth quickly until it is cooled.
And then immediately repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge a cloth or cloth in the border mentioned above, and pause that on the painful tooth, and then pause over that iron heated until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But in any case, the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the quill of iron or metal to be heated red-hot and in its heart there is some grooves, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape that will come, and pause it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer is cooled; and do this several times until the pain is relieved or the next day.
And it is necessary that through the impression of that cauterizer, the patient will fill his mouth with good border and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cauterizer.
And cauterize as you wish, to the extent that it is possible for you.
And this is the form of the quill:
Twenty-second Chapter.
On Caustics for Hernias.
When hernias are full of flesh and cold humors, and they do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to facilitate the digestion of those slightly, then consider that you must ignite the cauterizer with a curved shape, having two ends with humps, so that the fumes from the cauterizer escape through the other end; and pause that ignited instrument over the apostema once, and another time if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the quantity of the apostema; and then let it be for three days and pause over it a cloth wrapped in border until what the fire has burned out is relived.
And then care for that with an ointment, tents, and cloths until it is healed.
Twenty-third Chapter.
On Caustics for Quinsy of the Throat and Constriction of the Larynx.
When the humors come out on the quinsy of the lung, and most particularly when this is due to coldness of complication, then consider that it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines; and then immediately cauterize that one at the root of the tonsil in the affected location.
And beware that you do not reach the tonsil with the cauterizer nor burn too much of its edge, but only a little.
And then cauterize that one with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it. And the cauterizer for that one is a cleft saw, as previously described.
And then care for that with water that has been preceded until it is healed.
Twenty-fourth Chapter.
On Caustics for Disease of the Lung and Cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humors, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, then consider that you must cauterize that one with two cauterizers on the furcula in the affected locations, upward and downward; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the chest between two mamillae; and let the cauterizer be a cleft saw according to the previous form.
And if you wish, then make your cauterization punctate with the cauterizers that are called puncture, in the form which is described in the punctation of earache.
And then make punctures into those [cauterizers]; and immediately care for that with water that is preceded until it is healed.
And now the cauterizers have three ramps where cauterization is done with that one: in one go you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Twenty-fifth Chapter.
On Caustics for Titillation that is the Head of Assistance.
When the Head of Assistance is dislocated due to lubricating humors and it does not return to its normal place, and you see that it has become dislocated in such a way that it tends to remain so, as we have testified, then consider that first reduce the dislocation, and immediately lift up the patient's head or on his shoulder; and then raise the vertebra which is in the posterior part of the citillic above the said parts by means of your left hand if the joint is dislocated posteriorly.
And then ignite the cauterizer with two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the vertebra until it penetrates that one into another part; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows: four heads of cauterizers.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauterizers.
And then pause over the cauterizer with pores containing salt, and immediately cause the patient to adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is made so, then consider that you must cauterize on the muscle with a cleft saw or with punctate cauterizers, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dried up and the patient is healed.
Twenty-sixth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Stomach.
When cold and many humors come out in the stomach to the extent that it extrudes from its natural completion and are multiplied in a room, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not take effect, then consider that the patient should be placed on his back, and extend his arms and legs, and immediately cauterize that one with three cauterizers: one cauterizer leaving the chest for the quantity of a finger's length with a cleft saw, and two cauterizers leaving the two sides of the cauterizer, until the figure of a triangular cauterizer is formed; and elongate between those which are not adjusted so as to make a pillow.
And if the depth of the cauterizer is equal to the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the vertebra.
And the figure of the cauterizer will be according to this form, with addition; and if you wish, cauterize with a great cauterizer in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cauterizer according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And then cauterize the stomach punctate up to that which is feared from this cauterizer: and it is that you sense over the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tendons, and immediately cauterize that one with a cauterizer in the points; and immediately care for that with the treatment that has been preceded until it is healed.
Twenty-seventh Chapter.
On Caustics for the Foot Fret.
When the foot is affected by pain due to coldness or humidity or excessive sweating, and it has departed from its normal state through excessive evacuation, and the patient has not been cured with water as we have said, then consider that the patient should be placed on his back over his navel, and sense with tendons three cauterizers according to this form and this quantity pressed onto the foot below the hip bones, in which lies the seat of man.
And be the space between each cauterizer according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizers be according to the length of the straight arm.
And do not compress the flesh with the cauterizer.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the marrow of the vertebra, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then lie down, which has already extended its legs and raised its arms.
And if it is possible for you to cauterize these cauterizers with a cleft saw, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and be absorbed by the subtlety of all the vertebrae so that it is absorbed by the whole body and reaches the vessels, for the vertebra here is subtle; know this.
Twenty-eighth Chapter.
On Perforation of Apostema of the Foot with a Cauterizer.
When you need to excise or perforate an apostema on the foot and you want to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will be troubled by gravity and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, with great pain and many times that you have exhausted the doctors' cure.
Therefore, consider that the patient should be placed on his back over his navel; and immediately sense the location of the apostema with tendons; and immediately ignite the cauterizer which is assembled like a rag, its form having been described in another page. And then cauterize with that and the cauterizer until all the vertebra is burned, until it reaches the navel, until it becomes a healthy wound.
And immediately care for that one with treatment of other apostemas until it is healed.
And do not consider that this form of cauterization should be used except by one who has prolonged his study in the art of medicine and has known many diseases; but as for this one, it is bold at times on this operation, but yet leave that to us, and may it be so.
Twenty-ninth Chapter.
On Caustics for Pleurisy.
They said the ancient ones that the cauterizers of the roots of aristology should be made for pleurisy from cold and dry roots according to this manner; and it is this: take a root of aristology long and dry that is found, and it is as thick as a finger.
And immediately submerge it in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cauterizer on that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauterizers left guiding, one slightly declining towards the side below the beard, and with two cauterizers in the area that is declining between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly behind; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the foot; and with one on the stomach, and with three cauterizers behind; and with one cauterizer on that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauterizers on both sides of the foot, left guiding the cauterizer which is between the two shoulders.
And do not compress your hand with the cauterizer, but rather in the manifestation of the vertebra in work.
And already some ancient ones have said that among certain men who use a cauterizer of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that apostema and purulent matter is discharged, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
But in this perforation with a cauterizer there is no fear, for he who does so will soon afterwards find himself in the location of fistula which is not susceptible to healing.
Thirtieth Chapter.
On Caustics for Malaria.
When you cure the disease of malaria with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then consider that the cauterization is done in three ways, all of which are drying, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the malarial fever, following the figure of the cauterizers of the foot, whose figure has preceded.
And between each cauterizer be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cauterization be the same manner which we have said in the cauterizers of the foot, alike.
And do not compress your hand with the cauterizer; and the patient should be lying on his back.
And there is another way of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauterizer having two vertimentz, which cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the vertebra which is in the endright of the malaria, where the patient's left side is seized.
And be your elevation by which you elevate the vertebra according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizers may be made according to the latitude of the body.
And immediately insert the two vertimentz, ignite the middle one, so that with those you penetrate the vertebra from the other side.
And immediately extract the cauterizer; and therefore four cauterizers are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cauterizer having three vertimentz.
And immediately take care of the cauterizer so that it does not lay waste for too many days, because it is more certain than the other previous causes in healing.
Thirty-first Chapter.
On Caustics for Hydrocephalus.
Cauterizers are not applied in hydrocephalus, but rather in acute cases proper.
When you cure the hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with four cauterizers around the navel, and one cauterizer on the stomach, and another cauterizer on the foot, and another cauterizer on the malaria, and two cauterizers between the vertebrae of the back, and one cauterizer in the right side of the foot, and another cauterizer on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterizer should be proportioned to the subtlety of the vertebra.
And immediately leave the cauterizer unburied, so that it may remain for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient's cure by cauterization with water as is necessary, so that two intentions are added to it, and it is hastened with the help of healing.
The form of the cauterizer with which the belly is cauterized is cleft-like, according to the form that has preceded it, and it is this one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
Thirty-second Chapter.
On Caustics for Feet and Legs.
When the feet are apostematous in dropsy and full of serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on top of the ankle bone in nocturnal water that is between the auricular and the anular, and lift up your hand with the cauterizer and do not twist it; and immediately lift up your hand, and do not return to it at all, because the serous water resists.
This is the cauterizer according to this form: And immediately make two cauterizers on both legs, and in each leg make a cauterizer at the extremity of the cleft saw. And be the cauterizers according to the length of the leg: one at the ankle and the other below the middle of the leg; and on each leg, two cauterizers.
And leave the wound open without healing for a long time, so that some water may flow out of it.
And immediately cure with those causes which we have said.
Thirty-third Chapter.
On Caustics for the Belly.
When the belly is troubled by flatulence and humidity, so that it debilitates the virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with water according to the methods of treatment and does not confirm, and sometimes the patient suffers from a caustic display of virtue, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize it with a large cauterizer on its stomach, following what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the ring-shaped cauterizer and four small cauterizers in the circle of the navel, with a cleft-shaped cauterizer; or with two cauterizers.
And if sometimes the humors exhibit themselves and the patient tolerates water, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize it on the navel and on the intestines, and firmly adjusting two cauterizers on the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Thirty-fourth Chapter.
On Caustics for Old Hemorrhoids.
When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of the thick humors that are fretted or corrupted by humidity, and are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm with your own cure, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizers on the posterior part of the small triangular bone and the small triangular bone, and with one cauterizer above the navel cleft by two threads.
And if you find that the stomach of him is inflamed and his food is not digested, and his face is sometimes apostematous, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with a large cauterizer on his stomach, following what has preceded; and with one cauterizer on his foot, and with another cauterizer on his malaria, with a cleft-shaped cauterizer; and leave the cauterizer open for some time, and immediately cure him until he is healed.
Thirty-fifth Chapter.
On Caustics for Abscesses, Properly Made.
When you cut away the abscess, then immediately ignite the cauterizer that is similar to a ray. And immediately insert that ignited cauterizer into the abscess cut away, and lastly your hand so that the cauterizer reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows.
And make it once or twice, because if there are many abscesses, then immediately cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and immediately cure those with water that agrees with their conformation until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on something, it is more likely to be in judgment.
Thirty-sixth Chapter.
On Caustics for Fistulas, which are made in the natural parts of him.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified by this, it should be cured with a cauterizer.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the natural parts of him and it is old, and corrupted by pus and corrupt humors, and thus what is more worthy than to cure it is to pierce it with a subtle instrument, and immediately know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned instrument.
And immediately ignite the cauterizer which is similar to a ray. And immediately insert that ignited cauterizer into this fistula, and according to the quantity of depth which the instrument indicates.
And repeat the cauterization on that fistula until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one or two or three strokes, according to your own necessity.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or to the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not make a move except when the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain it is not penetrating.
And immediately cure that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and all matter has been removed from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it is now entirely healed.
And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prepuce of him, or corrupting, or going to those causes which will bring reminiscence in its place.
Thirty-seventh Chapter.
On Caustics for the Throat.
When in the throat there is pain caused by inflammation or great ventosity, and for that reason the patient's voice is hoarse, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize that area on the throat with a cauterizer on each ronho, with a cleft-shaped cauterizer of which precedes the remembrance.
And firmly cauterize with the second one a little bit away, so that three lined cauterizers will come forth, and therefore they will be more likely to be in judgment.
Thirty-eighth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Bladder.
When debilitation and mollification occur in the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient's urine does not retain its normal consistency, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize that area on the most posterior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the navel begin, and cauterize with one cauterizer on the right side and another on the left side.
And be the length of each cauterizer according to the quantity of knots in the bowstring; and cauterize that area with a cauterizer on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauterizers if necessary.
And be the cleft-shaped cauterizer as it is processed.
Thirty-ninth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Arteries.
When there is inflammation and humidity in the arteries, and for that reason it is prohibited from being provoked, and the menstruation of him is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs due to the hardening of them, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cauterizers in the circle of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterizer on the most posterior part of the back, or with two cauterizers; and be the cleft-shaped cauterizer.
Fortieth Chapter.
On Caustics for the Dislocation of the Ankle.
When moist humors are effused to the part of the ankle, and causes of swelling occur in that location, and a sign of it is that the leg is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is situated in him who has been broken in his foot.
Therefore consider that it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a ring-shaped cauterizer, as you have marked with an instrument in the circle of that part, and because the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And be the cauterizer which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cauterizer is not available to you, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with three cauterizers and a large olive-shaped one.
And make the cauterizer according to the quantity of the subtlety of the entire vertebra; and immediately cure that area until it is healed.
Fortieth-first Chapter.
On Caustics for the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the ankle, and its cause is inflammation and moisture, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not confirm, and that is corrupted, then consider that it is necessary to purify the patient's thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and immediately cauterize that area.
And the method of the cauterizer in that case is according to two methods: or cauterizing with burning medicines, or cauterizing with fire.
And thus according to two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the part of the ankle of him with three triangular cauterizers in this shape; and make good depth in those. And be the space between each cauterizer the quantity of the thickness of the digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cauterizer.
More often than not, there are four cauterizers on the middle location above the head of the ankle, for they are.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and thus be a continent circle that consumes the subtlety of the entire vertebra.
And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the joint.
More so, if it extends into the joint, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize with two cauterizers on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain; and with one cauterizer on the femur for four or five threads a little above the pubic bone.
And if the cauterizer is cutellated, and be the depth of the cauterizer according to the quantity of the subtlety of the vertebra.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended into the location near the tips of the fingers, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize here where you feel with a cauterizer for three or four points or more if needed.
And if the patient feels that the pain is left below the kneecap and goes to the joint, then consider that it is necessary to cauterize here with a cutellated cauterizer.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not burn nerves or large arteries, and that by doing so, it would be bad for the patient or cause a counteraction.
And you have already seen one and another of those who were cauterized on the femur and finally in the cauterization, and the inflamed fiery focus inside which the tumor has reached its peak, and the perforated and corrupted foot. And immediately a violent solution of the bowels, and immediately death follows.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones say that in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the method: make it similar to a iron circle with a circumference equal to half a palm; and be the width of its orifice according to the thickness of a walnut or slightly less.
And within that circle be another one third; and be the space between them the quantity of knots on the bowstring; and be those circles two-partied; and be the length of them one knot or two knots, and make in those iron margins decently adorned with the circles; and this is the form of it:
And immediately ignite it in the fire until it becomes red and gives sparks, and immediately pause over the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side. And then cauterize that area with three cauterizers rounded in one stroke.
And immediately leave that area alone for three days, and immediately apply an emplaster to it with a border, and leave the wound open for many days; and immediately cure that area with remedies until it is healed.
Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this kind of cauterization we have used but little due to the fear of the regard of him, and therefore we have found few who look upon it.
But among the best cauterizers is he who suffered them himself, and found the location of him.
But cauterizing with burning medicines is what you do by making two circles having a perforated ring in which the goffer of the iron gate should be placed; be the length of the walls in the height of them two knots or as many as there are.
And if the space between each one is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and be above and below, and be that they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And immediately pause over the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side, and place your hand on the part of the ankle; and immediately take cold water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water be with a small fire little by little, and keep that for an hour, and cause the patient to undergo the mordication and adjustment of him - when that mordication is as hot as fire - until the mordication ceases.
And immediately raise your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the ankle with warm water.
And immediately leave that alone for three days and pause over that border until the blackness of the adjustment is removed, and leave it so for some days, and run from there purification; this is the final in judgment.
And immediately cure that area with remedies until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the joint or the thigh, make him sit in water according to how it is done in the ankle equally.
And this is the method of cold water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of cause not extinguished from both sides of the one part, and crush them and pause in a new wave of which the left side is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into him ray.
And pause in the fountains of the other wave that is poured into it, and take above that alkali and cause that is alive from the warm water which takes them up to a finger, and then you compress them with your tieua hand for good compression, and leave the hole that lets out sharp water from the left side of the wave that is poured into.
And immediately adjust all that water, and take the one above another living cause and another alkali renewed, because at this moment it is so strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine and cauterization of other members, for operation makes fire.
And some medicines mixed with those which are cauterized wide, such as teazyzic and mel anacrat and cause of sabo in such a way that they are mixed together.
And Gualia recounted the operation and cure of a man from ancient times who was cured of ankle pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnificently said that it was a great marvel of his, and says that he did not need another cure, and when it is healed in one stroke as recommended, for it is seen to be so strong that it has entered into the bath and surgery already.
And it is that he should be pressed with a certain vertebra, and if not found vertebra, then take fresh figua; and much be crushed with a little gray and be placed on the ankle in which there is pain, or on the joint, or on the thigh, and be tied.
And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient gives consent to the adjustment.
And immediately put him in the bath and then when his body is heated up, immerse him in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not good for anyone to use these medicines without the proper evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized in a goat's gash, it will profit to him much; and be the cauterizer with him according to this method: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
And immediately take dry goat's gash and inflame it with fire until it is made into carbon; and immediately place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And immediately repeat this, and do not stop doing so until the sensation of the mordication penetrates into the ankle and rests the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called the "cauterization of goats".
Fortieth-second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to multiple causes, such as by bruising or striking or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through infusion of wet and humid matter.
And the cauterizer is not cut off except in this one species which is made by effusion of wet matter.
Therefore, it is good to evacuate the patient with fetid pills and similar ones that are made on the two places where there is pain, three lines according to their latitude, plus one tenth in each line, as many cauterizers or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and his virtue.
And make a cauterization with pointed cauterizers.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizers with a medial claw shape according to this form:
Forty-third Chapter.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Goutiness.
Many times this illness attacks small children; and the signal of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their structure in the heel and causes elevation and movement.
And you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the knots of him that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize that area with cauterizers that are circles according to this form: that takes the cauterizer over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with pointed cauterizers two lines or three. And be the points proper between them.
And immediately cure that place until it is healed with water as we have said.
But beware, for cauterization should not be administered in goutiness that is caused by spasms of nerves.
Forty-fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by humid humors that envelop each member of the body, then when pain comes to the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this "gout" properly.
And therefore, since gout caused by humid humors is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not removed, then they are removed with cauterization.
And it is that you cauterize that area immediately after evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauterizers.
And be the olive-shaped cauterizer, the form of which is this:
And if it is necessary that points are made on the sole of the foot, then make them with pointed cauterizers. And if the pains rise to the knuckles or to other joints, and many times it develops, then immediately cauterize that area on each knuckle with three or four cauterizers of all parts with this olive-shaped cauterizer.
And if many cauterizers are necessary for this cauterization to be yours, then immediately cauterize that area and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer before, so that it is only as much around the specificity of the code.
And if the pains rise to the knuckle and the two places, then administer the cauterizer which we have said in its own chapter.
And if the pains are only in the masses and is called "sorcery", then puncture in the circle of the fibers as they rotate, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said places, then puncture in the circle of the fibers on each knot and on the tip of the finger.
And if the pains rise immediately for several days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on every part of the aids.
And do not evacuate the patient without good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is made with good regimen and humors are evacuated through this cauterization, then he will be healed, God help.
Forty-fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Wounds.
When a wound develops in the groin and says that it is hardening, and this is beginning to spread, then it is good that you tell the patient to stop eating on his usual day and to use gentle causes so that the wound will come out of his belly.
And immediately follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his arm inside until it is fully extracted or appears with the thread or buds.
And immediately return that area with your said fingers and signal the rupture on the bone of the shoulder blade, with a sign that is similar to the middle of a circle at the upper parts of the chest.
And immediately ignite the cauterizer, the form of which is this:
until it is very red and emits sparks. And immediately reduce the thread or the thread to its natural condition, and immediately place your hand on the location so that the thread does not spread.
And you have already inserted between the patient's joints and left one joint, another serves on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own hands.
And immediately place the cauterizer on that sign with your hand and cauterizer standing upright, and cause that to go into the bone of the shoulder blade into the middle of the diaphragm; and repeat in another way if you did not succeed in the first attempt into the bone.
And observe wisely the thread's yarn in the hour of your cauterization, that you do not burn that thread so that it does not bring great harm or mortal danger to the patient.
And know that when you are with the cauterizer, do not touch the bone, nor confirm your operation.
And it is good that the cauterizer for children be subtle according to their great and measure of them.
And immediately cure the location of the cauterization for three days with a border, until the scar of fire is removed.
And immediately cure that area with other remedies until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
And it is good that you pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of time of his cure, which stretches his belly, and that the thread does not spread outward from the effort of healing.
And immediately when you wish to lift after 40 days, then administer it gently and keep him for another 40 days.
And he should be reduced in work and in filling with food and drink, and in violent voices, for when you use this regimen of entire salvation, then he will be healed.
And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and do not want to stop, then cauterize the rupture with red cauterizer according to its quantity, and it is this that is exhorted from the code just as the third part of it; and immediately cure that area with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And already some first ones said that rupture should be cauterized with triangular cauterizer according to this form, since it is signaled by intention:
and a paused line that goes by the latitude in the lathe, plus above the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand with one claw-shaped cauterizer, but the first cauterizer is lighter and better.
Forty-sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Hiccups.
When there develops in certain members by bruising or striking pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is good that you cauterize with pointed cauterizers.
And be the cauterizer for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and defect of it, location of hiccups and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is cured by the first cauterizer, good; and otherwise, then immediately repeat the cauterizer on that member; for it is customary with those pains to be punctured in a member to that member which approaches the one, so that you must succeed with those cauterizers until the patient is healed.
Forty-seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some lepers occasionally with cauterization by great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy is caused by putridity of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not denied, nor stayed, and fear for the patient that corruption may comprehend all of his body and all his composition, then cauterize that person on the head with cauterizers: one in the middle part of the head, and another two fingers' breadth from it, and on both sides over the ears; and one behind, on the back or nape.
And finally place your hand with the cauterizer a little bit into the bone so that it makes a small impression on the skull, and from there the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated for him; and cauterize on the molars according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is good that you cauterize him with those cauterizers which we have said on the head; and with a cauterizer on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizers on both cheeks, and two cauterizers on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauterizers on the vertebrae of the back, and one great cauterizer on the vertebra close to the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each hip bone, and two on each shoulder blade, and two on each elbow, and two on each knee, and one on each wrist, and one on each ankle; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the fibers of his shoulders.
And take care not to burn those nerves which are over the tendon, lest you damage them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cauterizer on the shoulder blade bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauterizers, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cauterizer, just as they have in their own flesh, because his body is already stupified.
And it is good that the cauterizers are great or small according to the members and joints, as is preceded by the species of the instruments.
And immediately cure the cauterized area with powdered errors' crust, mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Forty-eighth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Stupor.
When any member is stupified or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stupified member with cauterizers according to the magnitude of the member or its smallness.
And let your cauterizer enter a little bit into the substance of the code. And immediately cure that area with remedies until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which develops in the muscles and bones, and in the vertebrae of the back, and then the numbness of the nerves which affect that member is removed, and the stupor is restored.
But do not assume anything about this, unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Forty-ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Moles that are Melanomas.
When moles are old and do not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on it with a pre-emptive cauterizer for a little bit according to the quantity of the specific code until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color of it is changed.
And immediately cure that area with powdered errors and lentils mixed with red oil and leaves of arnica, and blood of dove or blood of heron, each taking one part and all being mixed together; and then let a cloth be applied to the location and placed there until it is healed.
Fiftieth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Gout.
When gout is beginning and you want to stop it, then cauterize that area with a circular cauterizer in the circle of it as it revolves.
And they say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterizer in the middle location; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may ulcerate, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circular cauterizer as we have said, or with many cauterizers.
Fifty-first Chapter.
On Cauterization of Adulteries.
When any adulteries are delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluity causing that, or because of the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of adulteries; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctate cauterizers; and immediately release that which will fasten in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cauterizer, then you should ignite the cauterizer whose form is this: and place that in the middle location of the adulteries until the code penetrates.
And if the cauterizer is placed in that location which is further away, because the arm of the body is relieved; and immediately cure that area until it is healed.
Fifty-second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrosion is corruption walking in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a location where it can suffer cauterization with fire, then you should ignite cauterizers with claw-shaped tips, small and large according to what is convenient in that location where the corrosion is.
And immediately cauterize that area completely, until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause for it.
And immediately release that area for three days, and pause over the cauterized locations only once a day with oil mixed in to bathe them until all the scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And immediately cure that area with flesh-generating remedies.
But if after three days the flesh grows back healthy and free from corruption, good is; but if not, then immediately repeat the cauterization on that area which remains in the corrupted locations.
And corrosion is treated with acute medicines, because that is a means to cauterize. But nonetheless, cauterization with fire is of greater benefit.
And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will need it.
Fifty-third Chapter.
On Cauterization of Nails and other similar things.
Many times it happens that the parts left behind from the bad disease that is called nail, and it is a great cause, penetrating, which lames the foot; and cauterization in those areas is done according to two ways, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
But cauterization with fire is when you ignite the cauterizer with a concave shape similar to that of a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the nail from all parts, and has subtle margins.
And immediately pause that ignited cauterizer on the nail, and immediately revolve your hand with the cauterizer in the circle of the nail until the cauterizer reaches the depth of the nail. And release that area for three days until you begin to see growth. And immediately apply that area with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and release the application of the emplastrum on that area for one night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
And immediately cure that area with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times it happens so on the surface of the body, most especially in the muscles and bones, then it is good that you administer cauterizers with water; and this is done by taking a cannula made of earthenware or iron or beak of vulture, and placing it on the nail; and immediately pouring a small amount of hot water into the cannula, and retreating your hand, and revolving the area with compression of your hand all around, so that the margin of the cannula is pressed against the root of the nail, and allowing the hot water to flow slowly through the root of the cau; and waiting for the patient a little bit for the mordication of the hot water for an hour, and then releasing it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do the same for those and then immediately apply the other to all of them as they are in the body.
And immediately cure those areas where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with remedies that cause flesh to regenerate.
Fifty-third Chapter.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When it happens that someone has a tremor due to constriction in the nerves or due to fever of a causing constriction, or for another similar reason, then it is good that you cauterize that area with four cauterizers or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra and one cauterizer; and on the feet of him, and on his stomach with olive cauterizer.
And the tremors of him cease and hasten the healthiness of the constriction-causing disease.
Fifty-fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Accidental Pains in the Body.
When in the body there are accidental pains and pus-filled abscesses which are caused by gross corrupted matters; therefore it is good at the beginning as appears, that it should be cauterized on top of the fistula with a subtle cauterizer made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of long-lasting erestology; or with a lentecular cauterizer.
And sometimes it is good to cauterize at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, and it is interrupted the superfluity causing those things, and it cures those.
But nonetheless, it is good that this be done with immediate evacuation through phlebotomy.
Fifty-sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Blood Vessels Accidentally Cut by Artery Incision.
Many times it happens that the artery is cut which causes the wound to bleed profusely or causes the incision of apostemes or cauterization of a member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that bleeding.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, then you should immediately take a cloth with your hand and apply it to the orifice of the artery, and place on top of that the same method I have described many times until the bleeding of the blood stops and is no longer.
And immediately apply in the fire small and large olive-shaped cauterizers by number of pieces, and exhale upon them until they are made to be no longer.
And immediately take one small or one large of those olive-shaped cauterizers according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, on that vein which hastens more quickly than you have already cauterized the said, and apply it until the bleeding of the blood is stopped and reduced.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you have removed the said and extinguished the cauterizer, then take another cauterizer carefully among those which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this immediately until the bleeding of the blood is reduced.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that another harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods: or with cauterization as I have described, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities are burned and the bleeding is reduced; or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligament by strong constriction, or that medications be applied to those places whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and be strengthened with pillows and decent constriction.
But he who administers decent constriction to it with ligament and with strong constriction by means of cloths or by position of burning causes and similar things does not heal until later.
But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine, then do as I have indicated above on the orifice of that vein, and understand the great constriction of it until the bleeding is stopped from the highest part of the wound, and on the artery let it not be removed; and over the artery sprinkle with hot water of great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more carefully consider whether there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
On Incision and Perforation, and Vents, and Phlebotomy, and Wounds, and their Similar Things.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is suitable and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary in those things with the forms of the cauterizers; and we have organized the chapters of the subordination of the head to the feet.
And you will continue in this chapter in that same way, so that the one who wants to learn this will be illuminated, just as he has requested.
And before you begin this, it is good, son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is for fear that it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for this, it is good that there be great caution in you, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation of blood takes place, and which contains the life, and the aspersing of the vein or incision on the aposteme or warning of exit or purgation of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of peyra and their similar things. And of all those, you are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them, death.
And I admonish you that this should not fall upon you in which there is situation, because sometimes the case demands from you methods of men with many methods of diseases. And from them some will go away with their own disease and it is soon death for him, and thus by the vehemence of what he finds in his disease, and by the length of his disease, and with his disease there is fear which means death.
And from them some will be given to your own child and said, you waiting for his health, and his own disease is pernicious.
And therefore it is not good that you consent to him who comes to you with this method; and your caution be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not presume any cause over this unless absolute certain science which verifies this for you, and by which the praise-worthy success follows.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses prophesying and indication of that which is converted to health, for in that there is aid to you on the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires His understanding in you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in His hand.
And I have organized this chapter into distinct chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you that which you request and need.
First Chapter.
On the Cure of Water Which is Contained in the Head of Children.
Know that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the navel is tightened on the child's head it causes.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, death has been imminent, and thus it has been shown to me that the work is laid out in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water had his head always thus magnified to the point where it could not be contained even by its own size; and more so that the moisture increased to the point of mortal fire.
And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates below the bone on the forehead.
Therefore, the operation in that case where the moisture is between the bone and the skull and the aposteme is small, then it is good that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be about two nights until the moisture flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the moisture is more increased and the aposteme is greater, then it is good that you make two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of it is that you should lift up the commissures of the head from all parts and the water is pressed out when you compress that with your hand to the partitions inside and it will not be hidden from you. It is good that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
And immediately after the incision, extract all the moisture; and immediately strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and immediately insert something on top with vinegar and oil within five days, and immediately remove the bandage and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers the magnitude of the aposteme and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the aposteme appears and the filling of water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and if blood flows out and the patient dies from that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Second Chapter.
When it happens that someone has catarrh or swellings on the eyes or feet, and this is old, and there is no hope in it for the cure of medicines, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore it is good when you want to incise those that the patient's head becomes inflamed, and immediately make a rough cloth compress on the spot so that the arteries appear, and immediately strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and immediately consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each one over the places which are near the ears, are pressed down, and only in some men.
And immediately signal on the artery with a tent, and immediately incise each one with the spatula of each part, sharp as it approaches the bone, and this is done by the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, enter the spatula below the artery and cut it at the points of incision on the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' breadth, for when some vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating gush, which springs forth by frequent jumps.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is good that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers' breadth, and immediately signal with a tent, and enter into the bone.
And as for what is to be taken from the blood, it is a quantity of vinegar one ounce. and as for what is to be taken from the blood, it is a quantity of vinegar one ounce, or more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears in the virtue of the disease and the filling of the artery of it.
And immediately consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the forehead, then incise it in order that it may not develop into a cauterized aposteme.
And immediately strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and immediately cure it with compresses until it is healed.
Third Chapter.
On the Extraction of the Arteries Which are in the Temples.
When some ancient or chronic disease is present in the temples, due to humidities and qualities of the lacertae, or old and vehement sores similar to those, and it has been medicated with the methods of medicinal cure, but this does not bring comfort, then we have recourse to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those similarly as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient scratches the skin where the arteries are located in the temples; and understand by the pulsation of the artery apparent on the temple, which is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden from most men except for those with great fervor.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and immediately compress the spot with a rough cloth or evaporate the spot with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And immediately scrape the bone with that with ease until you reach the artery; and immediately cut into it on top and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the bone and uncover those beneath, from all sides.
But if the artery is subtle, then immediately envelop it with the extremity of the oncus; and immediately incise one part of that according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no outflow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
And immediately evacuate one ounce of blood. until three ounces.
And if the artery is large, then it is good that you divide it into two parts with a double fold of cedema or with strings at length, and do not let it putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and there is an outflow of blood.
And immediately incise the superfluity which is between two bandages; and do this in that hour or at another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer in the bone and with a cutlery-like cauterizer until the extremities of it are incised, and remain in that same place.
And it is better work when the patient has fever or is of warm complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish off the humidities, and therefore it is better in this case.
And it is good to immediately extract the arteries which fill the old cut with blood, and be paused over the decently made pulpits, and immediately be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and become hard in order that it may be healed.
And if while you are working another time the blood flow from the artery occurs, then immediately grasp to restrain that blood, or with a cauterizer, or fill the old cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if any of these causes are not present before you, then immediately pause your hand on the spot until the blood is congealed, and insert the spot with hot water of great coldness so that the sharpness ceases, and be strengthened as needed.
And that which is more easily done in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a tent, and each one, not ignited, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it may be lengthened, for they are not yet fully consolidated by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
And the sharpness of the two blades is as follows. But meanwhile if there is less sharpness than two blades are better, for if they are as keen as two blades near each other, and do not cut through the flesh with speed.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, it is held that the heat of the fire is in those and the flesh is cut away slowly.
And this work is better than all works and more gentle.
And the space which is between the two blades is equal to the thickness of the finger.
Fourth Chapter.
On the Cure of Corneas with Sharp and Acid Lachrymation of the Eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are above the forehead of the head is outside, and there is no comfort in this with any cause of medicinal cure, and the face of the patient becomes red and feels like a wandering march of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, humidified so that the skin of theirs is congealed, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient doctors mixed in the cure of those with this operation, and named that cure as "spassa".
And it is that you command the patient to scrape the skin which is on his forehead, and immediately incise three cuts evenly distant along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers' breadth: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision is three fingers' breadth.
And if you have a sponge or cloth, well dressed and moistened with the liquid in which blood is congealed.
And immediately insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, the form of which is as follows: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Scrape off all the bone that is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and immediately do this from the first incision to the second incision. And immediately grasp this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a cutlery, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the blade of that instrument so as to cut through the attached flesh and bone, and the edge of it should lean inward towards the bone, and push it forward until it reaches the middle incision, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
But continue the incision up to where it appears on the bone, and immediately do this in the middle incision until it reaches the other incision.
And when the quantity of blood that has been extracted is equal, press out the places where the vessels of the congealed blood are located.
And immediately pause in each incision a cut of old cuttlebone, and pause over those pulpits filled with vinegar, oil, and vinegar mixed together, so that there may not be an outflow of cauterized aposteme.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer great abundance of hot water or bathing, and immediately cure it with a compress of basil and rose oil, and other things until the wounds are healed.
Fifth Chapter.
On the Cure of Lachrymation through Cautery and to the Eyes descending from the Parts outside of the Head.
When certain veins are cauterized and continue, and the eyes of the patient are exhausted and small, and their regard is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and their skin dry, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know by these accidents that the matters and cauterization do not come from many veins of the parts outside but proceed.
And the best cure in these cases is this: that you command the patient to scrape his forehead, and immediately incise a cut at the middle of the forehead, a little off-center (and it begins from the incision of the left temple to the right temple; and the incision is into the bone; and lengthen your hand over the lacertae of the temples which are more towards the mastoid process), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or cloth, and immediately fill between the two lips of the incision with old cuttlebone or cloths dipped in vinegar. And immediately press down upon those pulpits filled with vinegar and oil, so that there may not be an outflow of cauterized aposteme.
And when you have removed this and see that the aposteme is diminished, then it is good to press upon the bone until it begins to appear as flesh, and immediately cure it with an emplastrum exsiccatiu which makes the flesh appear, just as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mixed them together, and from this make a poultice and administer it in these wounds at the time of the natural birth of flesh.
Sixth Chapter.
On the Cure of that which Catarrhs in the Ears.
The total cause that catarrhs in the ears is one of four species, for either it is mineral pyrrhea or a similar cause like iron and verdigris, or it is from plant material like cypress or fava, or it is a fluxible cause like water and vinegar mixed together with their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore, when pyrrhea or another similar cause that does not agree with the ear catarrhs in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if sometimes the pyrrhea appears, then immediately distill some oil of violet or samama into it, and administer the extraction from there, and make the stornutation according to condition, and block the nostrils beforehand by the event of stornutation. And immediately pause in the cavity of the ear some cloths or wool, and stretch the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes.
And if not, then immediately administer the extraction from there with the instrument called gestae epicicarios, of which this is the form:
And if forgotten with gestae, be it so; and otherwise, immediately administer the extraction from there with a subtle onyx of few duplications.
And therefore, if not forgotten by this, then immediately make a needle of iron and insert the extremity of the needle into the hole of the ear and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that only the needle is left. And immediately extract the instrument with strong attraction, for too many times as we have recounted.
But if not forgotten in this manner, then immediately take a halved light or a prepared vessel with which the hawks grasp a small quantity, and pause that in the extremity of the ray, and immediately envelop it with a decently placed cut. And immediately insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and immediately dry out the ear from its humidity.
And therefore, if not forgotten with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should cut it down before it becomes cauterized or spasmed.
And the manner of cutting it down is that you first bleed the patient from the saphena vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of the matter, and immediately make it cease between your hands and convert the ear to the parts above, and then make a small incision in the root of the ear at the location where the grey matter is previously prepared. And the incision should be of lunar shape until it reaches the pyrrhea, and when the pyrrhea is blackened, stop that if you can with suitable instruments; and immediately close the incision at that hour with speed, and cure that so that it may be healed.
And if the cause that afflicts the ear is one of the fat things that increase and are inflated, then immediately administer the cure and extraction from there; but if it does not obey your command to come out, then you take a spatula of fine tin according to this form: and administer with that the cutting away of that fat thing which is fallen into the ear.
And do not make it when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many places, and then immediately extract it from there with onyxes or subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for it is alleviated the extraction from there.
But in the water that has entered the ear, it is good for the patient to use stornutation according to condition at first, and fill their own ear with a little old cuttlebone, and then place a stone above that ear where the water is, and if forgotten, be it so; otherwise, take many sharp iron points and lemons of the same length as the finger, heat them in the fire for a while, and then have the patient insert one of those into the hole of their own ear and strike another point on the stone that is opposite the ear where the water has entered. Therefore, do not cease until all the water has been forgotten.
Therefore, do not cease until all the water has been forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten in this way that you take a piece of paper or parchment. and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end over the fire until the middle of it is burned.
and immediately place another piece of parchment and make it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract that with a needle as we have said above regarding the extracting pyrrhea.
But if in the extraction of beastiness that enters into that ear, it is a small thing, like this and similar, cure that as we have said in the division; but if it is from great body which appears on the sense of the vessel, then immediately administer the extraction from there with gestures and onyxes, and the cause of it is more gentle than all the other causes that afflict the ear.
But if in the extraction of vermin generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and your cure does not take hold, then it is good for you to gaze at the ear towards the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears here, then immediately extract that with gestures or subtle onyxes; but if no cause appears, then take a needle made of straw and broad at the top of which this is the form: And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and immediately suck out with it a strong sucking motion, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if it does not obey your command to come out, then you should block and close the circuit of the needle with wax as we have said; then immediately administer distillations which have already been tried by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make that of silver or iron, made from straw, with a small hole in it and a flat top.
And thus be as they pour into the cavity of the needle's container, here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the needle decently cut, and immediately drop oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or what you want from these medicines in the needle  and that is in the ear , and immediately insert the ray with a cut above and press it gently with your hand on the compression of the matter so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil flowing out.
And what is inserted in the ear has already been heated by fire for a little while. And be careful that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear cannot endure this.
Seventh Chapter.
On the Cure of Obstruction of Ears.
Sometimes certain children are born with the vents of their mothers not perforated, and this already happens in some men, obstruction in the meat of the ear due to a wound or flesh not having been there; and this obstruction sometimes is made in the forepart of the trunk of the ear which does not consent to the vessel, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the forepart of it, which does not comprehend the vessel, is in the most difficult dispositions for cure.
And when you succeed in comprehending the vessel, it is good that you pause the ear of the patient to the sun and gaze at it. And therefore, if there is an evident obstruction, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the end of it is in which there is a small latitude, where one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula is two-edged like a lion's tooth, for so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should extract that with subtle onyxes and cut through that with a vehement ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the forepart of the ear, then you should take a subtle iron ray and heat it slightly with fire, and immediately place that into the meat of the ear.
And therefore, if you have detected obstruction by that which the patient finds with ease, due to gravity of hearing, force the oppression of it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And immediately pause in the ear with cloth of linen according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have wrapped around it with Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some white lead and soak it in water and powder over it, followed by use; and if the ear has already become apostemated, then it is good that you remove the lead and replace it with another lead which you wrapped around it with rose oil, until the aposteme becomes calm; and immediately cure that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then immediately immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use the other cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Eighth Chapter.
On the Cure of Athelis which affect the Eyelids.
Athelis which afflict the eyelids of men sometimes are humid, and at other times dry.
Therefore, it is good that you take those with ten-handles or onyxes, and incise them with an spatula of the roots, and immediately pause over the places as said.
But if pain accompanied by bleeding comes, then you should cauterize those with a lunar cauterizer of subtle onyx.
And the best cauterization is to do it immediately after the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Ninth Chapter.
On the Cure of Grandessia which comes to the Eyelids of Men.
Many times it happens that in the eyelids of men some cause arises which is akin to Grandessia in its strength and hardness, and because of this Grandessia is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you should consider whether Grandessia is proceeding from there on the eyelid and is manifesting on all sides; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision on that with a fissure by the latitude, and immediately cut it off from all sides with ease; and immediately suspend it with an onyx and cut off the excess.
And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer harm from it because the ointment of it restores that and enfleshes.
And if Grandessia is declining towards the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outside, and immediately ease the eyelid and suspend Grandessia with an onyx, unless you are forced to make an incision; and press that from all sides, and if the eyelid through incision is lengthened, this will not help in any cause.
And immediately after the incision, wash the eyes with salty water; and cure the place with that which enfleshes until it is healed.
Tenth Chapter.
On the Cure of Axcirnach in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnach is a grayish substance which is generated in the tunic of the eyelid above, and more often affects children, aggravating their eyes and causing them to weep; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are shed upon them.
And for this reason you must always wet their faces and sleep on their faces, so that the eyelids of theirs below are covered with humidified skin, which has already been inflamed, and there is imminent danger of apparent inflammation in the eye; and when you press the place with those words, you will cause inflammation within them.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient places their head on the tie and you immediately place a cloth of linen and oil there, making a calque, and make from it a circle according to the quantity which contains Axcirnach from all sides, and immediately place that upon that and press with those words so that inflammation may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and immediately end in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incised with a fissure by latitude, and the fissure not be greater than the one made in flautobotomy.
But in the forepart it is good that you make a cut all around until you reach the inflammation, because in the most desperate cases, inflammation proceeds by fissure according to the form of white grayseness.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said ties to the outer parts and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is scattered.
And be careful not to insert into the fissure, lest with the spatula you do not reach the eye and disturb it.
But if there is no appearance of Axcirnach at the beginning of the fissure, but rather you adjust into the fissure a little with ease, so that Axcirnach may proceed; and immediately extract that as we have said; and immediately submerge cloths in water, vinegar and powder, and pause those over the place and strengthen them with polvils.
And thus some will trickle salt and pause it in the cavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that humidity may be dissolved.
And immediately cure that until it is healed.
But if there is an apostemate in the place which becomes calm, then you should cure that with soft plasters until it is healed.
Eleventh Chapter.
On Methods of Touching the Eye.
When in the eyelids of men there are born natural folds, and so becoming antiquated, then they no longer touch the eye and cause methods of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin, until this becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and it is cured in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterization; or by atactini made through incision and suture; or by canna according to what I will say.
And therefore it is good that you pause the head of the patient in the tie; immediately convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, then it is well; and if not, insert a needle into that part which is nearest to the edge of the eyelid on the side where there are no hairs - namely, among the hairs themselves - and make the needle penetrate above, and thus - near the margin of the eyelid - pull out the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and convert it with a ray.
And immediately end in the outer part of the eyelid below the hairs with a spatula incised with lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and immediately extract the thread and pause below the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and immediately shut over the eyelid with a tent, and it will be thus as the figure of myrtle leaves.
But nonetheless it is good that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because this has already been diversified in men, since some of them require that a great quantity of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And immediately end with the spatula on both lines which you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is like the natural folds as they are in the king's beard.
And immediately place the onyx in one of the two angles of the wound, and immediately extract all that, and adjust with a suture the two lips with a gulf or fine woolen thread, and absorb the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads to two eyebrows with some perceiving causes; if you wish to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
And immediately loosen the thread of the threads within three or four days, and immediately cure that.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and cure that with what dries up and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but suturing is better. And thus I say to those who came before me to taxine.
But nonetheless in him there is solicitude for the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in him fear.
And it is another manner in taxine, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure as of myrtle leaves, and immediately elevate the eyelid with three unctuous substances separated and congregate according to this form:
But if it is not possible to have the unctuous substances, and this is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and enter the other thread alongside the lacrimal major, and the second thread alongside the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said ties the threads with equality, and immediately elevate your hand with elevating motion, elevate all the wound over which is marked as we have recounted.
And immediately adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that until it is healed.
But if there occurs an apostemate because of your incision or your fissure, then calm that apostemate with cerote and oil-like substances, and with gentle remedies.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted so that its hairs are turned, then it is good that you use in that what we have said about incision; but suture in each case is more artificial.
Atactining with canna is according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure which is outside according to what I have recounted; and immediately make two cannae or two fine astals, the length of which is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of which is less than the latitude of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And immediately add each one with subtlety on top of what superfluously protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the cannae of each part with a very tight stricture, and leave it for some days, because the wound will die and become denuded and will fall inwards as it slowly descends.
But if it is delayed, then tear off the threads, and immediately cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two cannae which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and latitude neither more nor less.
Twelfth Chapter.
On the Elevating of Pricking Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough, and prickly to the eyes, the operation in that is that you take a fine needle and pause it in that delicate thread of silk or wool, and immediately adjust the extremities of it so that they fit together in a manner most subtle. And be the length of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
And immediately compose another fine thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that if you wish.
And immediately place the patient's head in the tie and it be proper for the sun, so that your work may be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And immediately insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair which has required engineering, and make it penetrate into the eyelid rapidly until you extract it above the natural hair.
And immediately pull out the hair upwards and insert it into the alloy, and be the hairs one, two, or three, but not more.
And immediately pull out your hand with that until the hair is extruded and alloyed in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if the alloy is attracted and not expelled the hair, you will attract the alloy to the parts below along with the thread which you have composed there, until it is expelled above the superfluous part.
And gaze at that with the vision of the eye, because then you will expel the alloy and the thread, and grate all and close the eye, and leave the closures for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows well on top of it.
And if the hair is too short, then you adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or let it be until it grows to a suitable space, and then you elevate that.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On the Cure of Echachration which appears on the Eyelid above.
When there appears in the eye Echachration, which is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, either above, below, to the right or left, due to bad consolidation of a wound or section or cauterization, and it is called Leporina, and this Echachration either occurs naturally or accidentally, and it is caused by consolidation of a wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The manner of the operation in this is that you open up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause within it a piece of linen cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
And it is not good that you use a cure for this of the causes which dry up and constrict; because if you do so, it will return to echachration worse than never had any.
Use in that a cause which softens, such as fenugreek, and mix with the water in which it is cooked, or with a gentle poultice of aquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all artifice that is not consolidated according to the form which it had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but some correction of echachration that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On the Cure of Echachration which is made in the Eyelid below.
This echachration which is made in the eyelid below, which is truly called vertadierament echachration; and it is either of natural or accidental origin.
But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or other similar things.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and put it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
And immediately extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a spatula broad. And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good; and otherwise, take a ray and pause it in the cut figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two incisions on the underside of the eyelid.
And be the extremities of the two incisions at two angles of the incision which you have made, where they converge, and be of their own making an angle, so that when they come together, a figure is formed by them.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda ().
And immediately stop the flesh there by the quantity that is the thickness of the eyelid below, so that it may be cut.
And immediately adjust the separated parts and sew those with a thread of wool; and immediately cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, until it is healed.
And if echachration occurs due to fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you open with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what has been said before. And immediately separate with a poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of echachration when it is above or below, let the operation run its course according to what has been prepared in the form of echachration, and that is in the form of various modes.
And the skilled artisans prepare artfully in every manner possible for each case, so that they may return the figure to its natural form or almost, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On the Adherence of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, it is necessary that the eyelid be solidly fixed above on the album of the eye, and prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and raise or extend it upwards with an unguent.
And immediately you incise the adherence with a spatula subtle, which is not sharp-edged, having a obtuse small part so that the patient may not be troubled by the operation, and leave the spatula so that it does not injure the eye in its subtlety.
And be your incision such that it excises that adherence with facility, so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all the adherence may be healed.
And immediately you put in the eye salted water with which you wash, or distill into it zymic substances dissolved in water.
And immediately separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of wool, and pause on the eye lanolin infused into the albumen of egg whites, and immediately use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On the Incision of the Ungue and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimals.
Know that the ungue is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, similar to a hard and subtle cipha, or non-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when it touches iron, or is forced to take on oil, it is abscinded and the oil is not fixed in place.
And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, which gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient puts their head in the tie and you immediately open the eyes of them, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and immediately collect the ungue with oil of little duplication and extend it to the upper parts. And immediately take a needle and enter it into that ungue with a horse or ox or cow hair, or similar thread, or a strong thread, doubling the extremity of the needle little by little and placing it in the middle of the ungue, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread to the ungue; and extend it to the upper parts, and excise on the side of the ungue which is before the pupil. And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
And immediately you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and lift up the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that by this incision there may not be continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the ungue with its extended oil or thread, as we have said, and immediately it is excised with a lion's spatula, the form of which is this:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
And immediately the incision causes in the eye a little salt to be extracted or made from the juice of the sinic tree, and leave it until the next day; and immediately cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the ungue is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed with oil in that place, then many times this species of ungue is cured by medicines, and is healed thus as I have said and recounted in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you work on the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula with keen edge according to this form: with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and is confused and enters into its root, then you distill from your own sight into the eye of sinic tree or with rose petal or with salted salt, and anoint the eye until the next day.
And immediately iterate over that the operation until all that is of it is remade, except that the contrary apostema may be in the eye, because then you leave it, and cure the apostema at the beginning until it is healed.
And immediately iterate your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The Eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the eye for great harm, is suspended with oil; and you incise that from one part, and do not complete the incision so that you may not excise continuous flows of tears.
And immediately distill into the lacrimal rose petal and sinic tree until it is healed.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On the Incision of Algae and Water that is born from Adjusted Flesh in the Eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people there is born red flesh, and it is overgrown to cover the pupil, or approaches or strengthens above the eyelids and firmly compresses the eyelids against the parts outside and is assembled like a rose of balcony.
But the operation in this is that the patient puts their head in the tie; and immediately opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with suitable oils and water, and then anoints it with a forceps or with a basket; and immediately incises the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the encisor, and be careful not to injure the eye by your operation.
And be your incision with which you incise those or with spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the ungue, or with small forceps with which is collected according to the form that will come to this chapter.
And then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is remade, immediately fill the eye with salted salt, or distill into it red powder and resembling those of corrosive medicines, and pause on the outside of the eye covered with albumen of egg whites until it is ensured against apostema caution.
And if there remains some cause of algae and is sealed with caution, and you fear apostema caution, then immediately leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with water that will heal that apostema, and immediately iterate over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
But however, you must ensure that the entire cure of the eye is through natural or accidental means, and not with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member being sufficient for that operation.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On the Collection of Scales on the Eye.
Scales which come forth red and rough on the eye and prohibit its operation, and disclose the eye with the length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which scales are present is strong and there is no other illness except scales, then you collect those scales.
And it is that you command the patient to put their head in the tie and immediately suspend those veins with one or two oils according to your prudence, and let that oil be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two oils gradually mixed together in a vessel according to this form:
And immediately those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and washed hour by hour, until you see those veins being remade from the eye and turned back.
And be careful that you do not injure the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed, immediately you distill into the eye green or red powder so that with its keenness it may corrode the water that is remade from the scales.
But if this is not possible for you, collect everything in that hour, and immediately apply all the water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed down and it is ensured against caution.
And immediately iterate over it in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Nineteenth Chapter.
On the Reduction of Nasal Discharge to the Nose.
When you cure nasal discharge with cauterization or acute medicine, as it is preceded by the narration of it and is not healed, then do not intervene in it except that you make an incision over the apostema until its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pour it into a container until the bone is revealed.
And then when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness occurs in it, immediately you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called the "Asper Cap", and is made of iron, and has a head rounded like an asher that is made pointed by lime or aliskalfati for subtle punctation (such as it is in this form).
And pause that over the corrupted part of the bone, and immediately rotate it between the said ties, and press your hand little by little until you know that corruption is scraped.
And then it is done several times, and immediately restore the place with causes of drying and purging.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and there are no more than 40 days, and it does not renew itself nor become apostematized, and no accident occurs in it, then you will know that it is healed.
And if not, then immediately do not intervene in it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and is that you uncover the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when it is uncovered, then you take a trip according to this form:
Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the shaft of it be first exhausted up to the extremity thus as it is sometimes.
And immediately pause that over the bone, and be it close to the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the eye, and immediately turn your hand with the trip until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by sensing that something is going to come out through which they are going to feel pain.
Therefore immediately restore the place with purgative medicines that dry, just as if it were a poultice.
Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, immediately the material that was flowing to the parts outside returns to the nose, therefore it is easier on the patient.
Twentieth Chapter.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
When the eye eminences to its total height and there is no accident or diminution in it, then you must loosen the patient, and immediately follow, and pause for vaporous breathing in the cervix without scarification and suck well; and immediately pause over the eye with a liniment made from acacia, aloe, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the poultice on the eye with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth be duplicated into four folds; and make powder from those.
And immediately pause those one on top of the other according to the quantity which the eye needs. And immediately strengthen on those with a cloth of hard and strong texture; and iterate the bellows with suction without scarification; and immediately stop the bellows and leave the eye straight for the day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament is softened, then you must immediately make it tight.
And immediately stop the ligament at the day and night as we have said.
And if the eye is already reduced, good it is; and otherwise, then immediately repeat the poultice with powders, tightening and bellows until it is healed.
Twenty-First Chapter.
On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunic and it is elevated and proceeds outside the palpebras like a grain of raisin, and its shape resembles that of a man due to this, and you want to incise it, then the operation in it is done as we have recounted, which is that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left and the part above, and immediately put the other needle into the double thread of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and immediately incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it firmly.
And immediately extract the needle and pause over the eye with lanolin infused in egg whites, and leave it until the thread dissolves into the uvea.
And immediately cure the eye with water that comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to great elevation, and immediately be perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the prominence of the eye, and flow the humectant substance albuginea, and descend the eye and enter soon.
And immediately strengthen until it is healed.
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On the Cure of Alconati.
This illness, which is called Alconati, is nothing more than pus that is adjusted in the eye resembling water descending and it is not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, and immediately take their head in your hands from two parts, and make them look into the pus as if they were looking at something; and immediately make it dry and not descend, and be quiet the light, and the patient sees the causes just as they see.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent of the pus with water as we have said, then immediately make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and find it on the panniculus cerning a small piece, that is to say, the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (to the location you see), until the pus is forgotten.
Therefore when it is forgotten, then you distill into the eye water cooled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have brewed fenugreek and honey.
And immediately cure with other causes until it is healed.
Twenty-Second Chapter (again).
On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable for perforation as we are declaring, then use that according to its suitability.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and tie their own eye tightly with a string.
And immediately pause your left hand near the patient's left palpebra if the eye in which the water is flowing is the left eye; or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
And immediately with your right hand take an almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
And immediately pause the extremity of the almond near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and immediately squeeze the almond with virtue and rotate your hand with it.
And immediately penetrate into the album of the eye and sense that the almond has already reached the desired point because of the vision.
And it is necessary that the path of the almond to the prominence be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And immediately pause the almond in the place where the water is, and immediately attract it downwards once or twice more, and thus if the water descends soon, then look at the patient over which their vision is soon to be clouded, and the almond in its own eye.
And immediately pause for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will lay that other way before the almond is dropped.
And thus when it is dried and does not descend, then you will extract the almond with ease, and rotate it with your hand little by little, and immediately dissolve in the water a small amount of clear gemstone salt and wash the eye outward; and immediately pause outside the eye with a cotton or stopper or lanolin infused in rose oil and albumen of egg whites, and bind with water the patient's eye.
But we have those of our time who pause on that which is mixed with albumen of egg whites.
And if they do not obey your almond at the instrument of the eye by its hardness - for it is some of those men whose eyes are very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called the "alberid" and this is its form:
And thus perforate with it that conjunction, and do not stop your hand in the hole, and it is only if you make a way for the almond to reach the subtle location.
And immediately insert the almond according to what we have said.
And you must complete your work, be prepared for the patient's sleep, which is made to descend in a place of darkness, and it is forbidden from all movements.
And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is aligned, and do not trouble their head to the right or left side at all.
And be the ligature according to its disposition within three days.
And immediately loosen that in the darkest and most obscure manner, and make them see some causes, and then return to the ligature within seven days.
And do not need to do that in the hour of curations or soon after the infusion. They had need that you should alienate this because the water flows more lightly by great and vehement regard.
But if an apostema occurs, then you must loosen the eye within seven days and correct it with water that allays the apostema.
Then you must absolve the vision from that and pause on the face of the mouth for which the direction of the left eye is regulated for a few days, existing in the darkest.
And immediately be guided by that greatest degree and converted into its own causes.
And know that in some cases the disciple is not exempt from seeing some things, and immediately you will be bold on the operation.
And it has been reached to us of some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that a fire is made in the Ayrac, great and perforated, whereupon the water is drained.
But meanwhile I do not see anything like it in our land which has been perfected, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magnesia for which there is something above those which are ignorant of those:
And they are made of iron or of copper properly, and they are the extremities of theirs with this subtlety triangular, the pointed end just as that is the form.
Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Cure of Carnousness in the Nose.
When in the nose there are born various fleshy growths adjusted of which some cause is assembled to scorpion's claw or polyp's foot; and this illness is called Polypus because it is like that of a fish represented. And from it there comes cancerous flesh, blackened and dark in color; and from it there comes lion-like flesh not of dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and anoint the nose with oil, and pierce the tongue once in those flesh. And immediately extract that from the parts outside, and immediately incise there what you have comprehended of those with a subtle spatula from one part into which you know that all the flesh is removed; for if any cause remains from it which abscission is possible, then you must ratify that with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains from it. But if you notice blood or an apostema occurs, then immediately pause on that which is necessary; for it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the blood is absorbed and all the cavities are removed.
And immediately be guided in the nose with the incision, whether it be with water or oil. But if the nose is open and there is humidity proceeding into the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is carnousness in the pustules or bones of the nose to which no abscission has been achieved.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the thread of faith into one who has some thickness, and nourish him in his very marrow, and pause between each nourishment the quantity of said or less, and enervate the illness and insert one extremity of the thread in the nose with the ray or another cause which is possible to it.
And since this will have been done, then draw their odorment into the channels of the nose, and be exhausted above their goiter, for many times they seem like children in schools, and it is a light cause to that which they wish to do.
And immediately pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that comes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately administer a serration of flesh to the knots that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already united with the knots of the thread.
And immediately extract the thread, and pause in the nose about the abstraction of blood one quart, and do this for three days or more until the flesh is completely consumed that remains of the flesh.
And immediately in the end of the cause, pause in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you degenerate from cure that exists, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument, the capillary purge maker, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make this of silver or copper, which is like a small open lamp, just as a small shell, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for capillary purging should be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you can grasp that when it is filled with oil or water that you want from the juices and suitable causes.
Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Holes in the Extremities of the Nose.
Many times it is born a hole in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in several days until it is seen as the regard of it.
And therefore it is necessary that you incise that in the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all that. And immediately pause on the spot or cauterize or medicine which is competent for that place.
But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is hardened, blackened, and lacks feeling; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times those who incise this apostema are driven by great malice towards him whom it had previously.
And if the apostema is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and times that incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the place with what exists and constrain it until it is healed.
Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Earlobe when continuity is dissolved by wound or appearance.
Know that when there occurs dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except in some men.
Therefore, when you are driven by some cause of those, know that if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, then immediately adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and immediately cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then it is necessary that you excise each part of its apparent cord until blood comes out. And immediately adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on top of those powder with dragon's blood and threefold thrice, and pause on the powder a plaster of diaphonic emplastrum, or of some other consolidative emplastrum, and let that be bound for two days or three, and immediately release that and replace it with another plaster, and let that be until the threads are absorbed, and immediately cure with anointing until it is healed.
But the method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity with threads, just as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread, just as I and thou wouldst make it known.
Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Extraction of those causes that come into the two lips in the parts behind.
Many times it happens to many men in the parts behind their lips that some hard and rough apostemas appear, resembling errors, and some are smaller and some are greater.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fissures of each of those hardenings throughout all parts, and immediately fill the wound with sagitarius triticum until the blood is restrained, and immediately be washed with hot oil and be cured the place with what exists, until it is healed.
Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Incision of the flesh adapted to the Gums.
Great many times there is a swelling over the gummed flesh which the ancients called "albulus", therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with once or what you have with the forfices and incise that as it should be, and let the pus flow or the blood.
And immediately pause on the place with sagitarius triticum or other powders that are stimulating or exciting.
And if that flesh returns, then immediately incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for the cauterization will not return again.
Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When in the surface of the teeth of the parts behind and those of the forehead, and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and blackened ones, some times they are blackened and are made citrines or greenish until the gum is corrupted and the teeth become loose.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head in your seat, and ratify the teeth in which those roughs and causes appear like sand until there remains no cause from them, and this makes of the blackness and citrinity and of the others until they are purified.
Therefore, if this is what is in the beginning of the reason, well it is; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those for another day and secondly and thirdly until it comes to the final statement as you wish.
And know that teeth have need of many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And therefore since the remedies for the tooth that is extracted from behind are different from those used between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of remedies must be prepared by you which you will see soon:
Thirtieth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and patience throughout its entire extraction, for there is no cause that supplies the vigor of it when it is extracted, since it is a subtle substance within which there is an excuse in the extraction of it.
But it is necessary when the patient is prepared to extract that tooth, that you be firmly certain which tooth is ailing, for many times the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and immediately the pain does not cease until the sick and aching tooth is extracted, as we have already seen by the operation of the barber's.
Therefore, since you must be certain which tooth is ailing, and you know well, it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in the part where there is some virtue, until the tooth is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and immediately proceed to cauterize that with your own fingers or with fine forceps, little by little, until it becomes concave.
And immediately afterwards, hold the tooth firmly with great tenacity for good articulation or strong extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers that well keep it so as not to trouble him, and immediately remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then immediately take one of those instruments and place it at a distance from the tooth on all sides with ease and effort to remove it in this way as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is bruised or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap with cloth the bruise and strengthen it at the end of a subtle ray in order that it may not be broken in the hour of your constriction upon it while you are holding it.
And it is necessary that you work exactly with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and remain parted from him, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the first pain.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity on the extraction of theirs, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great maladies which are more difficult to be broken, and their remedies rendered useless, or some of those, or that you extract it with some bones of the mandible just as many times we have testified.
And immediately after the extraction is done, wash the mouth with hot water or warm oil and salt.
And if there is bleeding afterwards, just as many times it has happened, then immediately apply some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not congeal, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine handles with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning should be of long extremity, short manubrium, and thick, in order that they may not bend when you are working with them.
And be like times of thick manubrium so that when you strain with those forceps they will not bend, with short extremities.
And be made of Indian iron with descending shapes like those of the right extremities, and in the extremities of those forceps be teeth that fit into each other and strain by strong constriction, and sometimes those extremities are shaped like the beak of a crane called ciconia, so it is guarded, and are of strong constriction.
Thirty-First Chapter.
On the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Bones from Mandibles Gnawed.
When you must extract a tooth which is gnawed by some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the place with a border for one day or two until the place is mollified; and immediately thereafter apply gentle or hold the extremities of those which are assembled to the beak of a crane called ciconia or guard, the form of the forceps:
Their extremities are made behind like lime or alfarfa.
And if it does not obey to your touch with these forceps or handles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root and uncover all the flesh and insert the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever whose shape is this:
And it should be of short extremity, thick and small, and not bent in such a way that it will not gnaw.
Therefore, if the root is forgotten, well it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
And already you help yourself with this instrument having two ramps, the shape of which is as follows: and with other instruments which precede in the extraction of teeth; for immediately it is made with this instrument which is assembled like a great once, and this is the shape:
of a twisted or short triangular extremity with some thickness, and not bent in such a way that it will not gnaw.
And know that many of the instruments for teeth are similar to each other and resemble the other instruments.
But the artisans skilled and subtle in their art, find for themselves according to what each operation and diverse diseases mean; for they are of diseases to which the ancients did not give nor pause a proper instrument, due to the forms of various species.
But if the bone of the mandible or of the other bones of the mouth is gnawed, or if it is puffed up, then immediately be very careful about that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures like this:
And it should be in the place some thickness, little by little, and be wrapped or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and immediately restore the place with medicines suitable for this.
But if there is a small puffiness in the bone, then immediately remove that from that puffiness and darkness, and cure it until it is healed.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
When the teeth are elevated and do not follow their natural form by those, and most especially when they appear in women, and most especially in venerable old ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is nothing like another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or bind them together, then immediately extract that one; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you must incise it with this instrument whose shape is as follows; and it resembles a pig's mouth, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
And be your incision in which you incise it for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not confounded with another tooth.
And if the elevated tooth is exposed to wear and tear, then immediately grind it with a file of Indian iron whose shape is as follows:
And be all of Indian iron and the edge slightly worn; and be of many small points like a file with which are made needles, with which the tooth is ground gradually over many days with ease, in order that it may not be confounded with another tooth and decay. And immediately finish grinding it to the end, and remove it with some rasors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is gnawed and the tongue lies against it, then it is necessary that you grind it down until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and made smooth, and be filled so that the tongue does not lie against it nor corrupt the word.
Thirty-Third Chapter.
On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
When accidents occur to the teeth in front of concussion and removal through percussion or falling, and the patient cannot strengthen over what is gnawed, and you have treated it with medicinal potions, and your treatment has not been effective, then immediately for this reason, so that they do not decay, make a filling of gold and not silver, because silver becomes green and immediately puffs up within some days, but gold is never changed.
And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the remedy is that you take the filling and double it inside two healthy teeth, and immediately increase the two curvatures of the filling between two damaged ones, or one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And immediately iterate the filling until you reach the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And be your constriction in which you bind the filling to the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
And immediately incise the superfluous extremities of the filling with forceps or toothed instruments, and add them to each place by gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And immediately release it as straight as possible.
But if it is broken or crumbled, strengthen that one or those with another filling in such a way for all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, tied together as these are bound.
And when one tooth or two returns to its place and settles in its own location, and they are restored as we have recommended, and remain.
And only good craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow's bones, and it is made from them as a form of teeth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth falls, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that purpose for a long time.
Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Incision of the Ligament Which Appears in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
This ligament which appears behind the tongue sometimes or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs by wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, and raise his tongue, and immediately incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recent constriction.
But if in that place there is some hardness or denudation, and it is fixed by the consolidation of the wound, then you must take care to cut and divide it according to its latitude until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And beware that there is not a fissure made in the skin of the flesh, lest you cut and divide here, causing an artery to bleed.
And immediately wash the marks of the incision with water or vinegar or with a rough water; and immediately pause, leaving the tongue loose; thus is the method which the patient should leave his tongue in each night so that it may not be consolidated again.
But if bleeding occurs, pause over the spot with a powdered vermilion; but if the blood flows, then immediately cauterize the spot with a caustic lance which is suitable for this. And immediately apply that cure to other causes so that it may be healed.
Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Ranula Under the Tongue.
Sometimes an aposteme forms under the tongue, resembling a small tumor, which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very little is magnificent enough to fill up the mouth.
And the operation is that you open the patient's mouth, setting it in front of the sun, and consider the aposteme.
And if you see it of a brown or black color, hard as stone, to which the patient does not have any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it is whitish and moist, then you must put the index finger into it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and cut off all around; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then immediately pause above powdered vermilion, which is red ochre, until the bleeding stops.
And immediately return to your work until you have completed it in the place where you began, washing it with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with another cure suitable for this, until it is healed.
Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Apostemes from Both Ears and That Which is Nothing in the Neck Gorge and Other Apostemes.
When something develops in the neck gorge, so are the glands which are gathered together, which protrude and are named two ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and do not heal, then you must consider if the aposteme is hard, of brown color, without sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that one with iron for the flow of blood; but let that one mature first, and then either you will break it off or it will break off by itself.
And if it is of white color, rough, and the root of that one is subtle, then that one must be incised.
And the operation is that you consider, before your operation, if the aposteme of that one has already settled down calmly or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then make the patient sit in front of the sun, with his head in its natural position, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue of that one between his most prominent fingers, holding it with an instrument of noble form:
And made of silver or iron, and be subtle like a knife.
Therefore, as you take hold of that tongue and the aposteme is shown to you, and you gaze upon it with your own eyes, then take an index finger and place that one in the angle, and pull it out towards the outer parts as much as you can. Or another cause that pulls out some part of the tunics, and then immediately incise it with an instrument whose shape is this:
Or another cause that pulls out some part of the tunics, and then immediately incise it with an instrument whose shape is this: and is assembled to forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the inward part of the other, very sharp, which is made of Indian iron well bent.
But if this instrument is not with you, then immediately incise that one with a spatula whose shape is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have incised one notch, then incise the other one according to this manner of incision, and immediately wash the patient's mouth with rough water.
But if there is bleeding, wash with water of decoction of mulberry bark or myrtle leaves and similar to those of the stiptic causes until the bleeding is stopped, and then cure that one so that it may be healed.
And sometimes there are other apostemes in the neck gorge, besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I said earlier in the incision of two notches similarly.
And I once cured a woman of an aposteme which was born in her neck gorge, which aposteme tended towards brown color, without sensation, which had already closed the neck gorge of hers, and the woman was breathing with great stricture, and had already been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already come to death's door if I hadn't acted within a day or two.
And the aposteme had grown so much that it had formed two ridges, almost ready to burst through two canals.
Therefore I took hold of the instrument and stuck it in one of them, and pulled that one out, and with it came a great piece, and immediately I incised the other notch of understanding from the other canal, and immediately I opened the patient's mouth, and comprehended her tongue, and immediately I placed the instrument in that aposteme.
And immediately you cut off a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it. Therefore the neck gorge of that woman was completely opened, and she began to drink water immediately, and immediately you prescribed food. And I did not stop incising that aposteme many times for a long time, and a successive aposteme grew in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Therefore I went away and cauterized the neck gorge of her, then added nothing more; and immediately I went on my way, not knowing what God had done to me.
Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Incision of Hives When They are Apostemed.
When the catarrh settles on the hives, and they are apostemed and long, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is in the part behind large and rounded, and then it is called a boil.
But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take hold, and the aposteme itself remains, and is subtle, then you must incise that which is aggregated round; and if it reaches that length, and is bloody, of brown color or black, and there is no sensation to it, then you must be afraid of incising it, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
And when you incise it according to the manner that I have said, with regard to its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit and take hold of her tongue with an instrument whose shape is this: And immediately place the index finger in the nose, and pull that one down and incise it with one of the two instruments which are said to be for cutting notches.
And it is necessary that you do not incise it too much, but only up to the natural term without addition, because if you incise too much, you will deprive your patient of speech.
And immediately after the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use force in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of cauterization is only with sharp water, and you must pause the patient's head in its natural position, and immediately press her tongue with the instrument which we have said, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and pour that one into it to make it live, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
And the extremity of it should be in the concavity where the medicine is placed, just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the hives, and the patient should lie on her side for so that the saliva or mucus of the mouth flows into the intrinsically medicated area, so that no other cause falls onto the neck gorge of hers and that it is cured.
And immediately take the medicine and express it onto the hives for the space of about an hour until you see that one to be darkened and calmed by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a canal above until the cloth adheres to that canal, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the hives, and then let it be so that it will dry up and fall off within three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and immediately after cauterization, wash off in the circuit of the hives with a cloth wrapped around the ray, and clean out that one with what is in the circuit of the medicine, and be washed with rough water, and be cured outside with embrocation, and inside with gentle washing until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and longer in its duration.
And sometimes the hives are cured with something even more subtle than cauterization and incision, because they are cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, chamomile, origanum, rue, Arabic aloes, camomile, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and combine all or some of them into a bath, and let them be submerged in vinegar, and boil; and the bath should be well stirred with a decent stirrer, and there should be a canal in the middle of the bath, above which is placed an instrument made of iron, shaped like this: made of silver or iron.
And the extremity should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the steam can reach the hives on the tongue, until the hives are somewhat obscured.
And immediately repeat this procedure many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the development of apostemes, because too much adjustment would occur in the aposteme, and you must not do that, but rather declare the aposteme of that one beforehand.
But if you don't have this instrument, then take a reed and tie it at the end of the tube to form a bundle of rushes, so that the patient's mouth is closed, because the closing of the rush prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Thorns and of what adheres in the Neck Gorge and other causes.
Many times things stick together in the neck gorge or thorn from a plague or some other cause.
Then it is necessary that you extract what appears from those things on which the eye looks, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the neck gorge, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because then the annexed cause of the neck gorge will be forgotten through vomiting; or that you give the patient a piece of bread or a root of lattuga or a bone of dried beef; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that one, so that when the thorn reaches its place in the neck gorge where it is extracted, then it will be forgotten. And take a snake and tie it tightly with thread, and then place it behind and suddenly extract it; or take a pot and suddenly put something in it and then immediately pull it out.
But if what does not appear and is forgotten with those causes which we have said, then take one instrument of lead shaped like this:
And it should be thicker than a ray, but smaller, and at the end of it there should be a concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And it should reach the top of the patient's head and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, because then it will enter into the body and with that which fills up the bone or the thorn, or that one puts its hand on it.
But in truth the patient that one inserts is sweet, by reason of its knowledge of the place where the annexed cause lies and fills it up, and pulls out its hand with the instrument on top, all according to the quantity which is prepared beforehand until it is forgotten.
Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Bloodstained Matter attached to the Neck Gorge.
When the bloodstained matter is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure by medicines and it does not take hold, then consider immediately the neck gorge of the patient at sunrise, because you will have compressed the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you find the bloodstained matter, extract it with a small instrument or subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the neck gorge of the patient, and immediately pause in the concavity of the tube an iron instrument heated, and do this many times (until the bloodstained matter is dead and falls out of the neck gorge) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
And immediately take a full vial of rough water, and open the patient's mouth with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause pass through it and spit out the water an hour after another by its own hand, because the bloodstained matter will soon get angry when it tastes the water.
But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cypress or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended for subfumigation of the hives.
Do this, and it will fall off in due time.
And there is another manner of operating in the subfumigation of that, which is: take a bowl in which are burning coals and cover the bowl with a cloth in the middle of which is a canal, and shape the end of the instrument in that canal; and then heat the subfumigation above; and have the patient put his mouth into the extremity of the tube, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodstained matter, for the bloodstained matter will soon fall off.
And if it doesn't work, then you repeat the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water, and make them eat salty and bitter causes, and not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodstained matter is extracted from the neck gorge when it appears; and it resembles forceps like those, but except that there is some curvature in it. which is placed in the neck gorge, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is worn down with lime, so that when you compress any cause, it does not slip away.
Fortieth Chapter.
In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against apostemes and in dealing with them.
The apostemes are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
And so diverse in piercing and cutting of them through two manners, of which one is by the species of apostemes in itself; and because they compress the humors.
And the second manner is proper to the places where accidents of the body occur, because the aposteme that occurs in the head is another from the aposteme that occurs in the backside; and the aposteme that occurs in the fleshy place is another from the aposteme that occurs at the joint; and each one has its own judgment by operation.
And some of the apostemes which should not be pierced, but rather allowed to mature in those places or complete their course.
So other apostemes which should be pierced when they are crossed, and not mature according to their completion, just as those that are proper to joints, for the aposteme when it comes to a joint is prolonged into what is in the circuit of it, and soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that member; or it is an apostema proper to the principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it until it becomes mature on the principal member; or it is proper to the backside, then pierce it unripe; and do not perforate it too deeply by non-completed digestion, but only that which is proper to the backside, so that the pressure of it is relieved and is elongated towards the outer parts of the backside, and a fistula is formed, or it is done in such a way that it is not healed. But it is necessary to know the hour of piercing the aposteme, and thus it is when it has matured.
And know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the ceasing of fever, and immediately after, the diminution of rigor and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the aposteme, and other signs.
And when you should know that the piercing should take place in the most distant part of the aposteme and nearest to the cure of the prominence.
And piercing should be done through the length of the flesh or the body, if the apostemes are in the parts of the muscles or the fats, and in places of the ligaments, of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
But when the aposteme is in a fleshy place, then it is better to wait until the perforation is confirmed by the digestion of that place according to its completion, as we have said; because if you pierce that one too soon, the body of the patient will be prolonged in suffering and much sorrow, and soon the lips of the patient will become hardened and the depth of it.
But some apostemes are pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or the body, as necessity demands, or according to that which the member needs.
And it is necessary to administer small piercing, and in large apostemes, great piercing and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the apostemes.
And some are those of the apostemes in which it is necessary to curve the code and make an incision, when it is made so that it remains in a term that has already stopped, just as those that occur in many cases of boils and pimples.
And of those which are incised with a section having three angles; and of those which is incised like the figure of myrtle leaves, just as those of the apostemes of the hernia.
And of those which are administered with a round section and a lunar section, and resemble those.
But that to which there is no such thing as are apostemes of the lion's superficial ones, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial or flat piercing only.
And it is necessary when the aposteme is large and has gathered much pus, that you pierce it and do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; having extracted one part, and then sealing the aposteme with another day's passage, and then extracting a larger part, and then making many observations according to graduation until it is forgotten.
And most especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a woman in childbed, or a child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the exit of pus, and soon the patient dies, and you should operate on them.
Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and accordingly administer your piercing in which you pierce these apostemes, so that you wash away the plagues and consider then whether the plague of the aposteme is small or a flat section; if it is a small one, then you should administer some of the old remedy or poultice; and if the aposteme is great, and the fissures of the piercing are many, then it is necessary that you pause in each hole until they all come together.
And if in the aposteme is abscessed a part of the code or has been concaved in the circuit, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or with a thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have torn off cloths or rags, their moisture; and strengthen that for three days; and then proceed to process it and cure the same part with what is needed from the instruments until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during the time of your operation, then you should administer rough water and vinegar in which a piece of linen cloth is steeped, and pause that over the place of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer remedies and treatments and poultices which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the aposteme is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you fill poultices with wine and oil warmed up, and pause those over the places.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is necessary that you pause poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this be warm until the third day, just as we have said, and then it is necessary that you loosen the aposteme and wash away that one and administer to its cure what is needed for its healing.
And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the universal cure of apostemes, but according to the way of distinction which I have said for each and every aposteme in a particular manner, by chapters specifically.
Fortieth Chapter.
Of the section of apostemes which come in the code of the head.
In the code of the head, small apostemes, and so many species of knots that contain tunics which are at their facts; and the species of theirs are many.
And among them are pustules, and among those are ones that contain moisture similar to lime. And among them are those that contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling their own kind; and among those are ones that are lapidean, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, just as you should extract them without causing contrariety to the arteries.
And the operation in section of those is that you probe them with an instrument whose form approaches thus, which is called entromes, until you know what contains.
Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then you should incise it with a section according to the length by a superficial section in this form:
And begins from the section of the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then as the moisture is evacuated, then you should excoriate that part which contained that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for many times it returns, if there remains some cause.
And accordingly, submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that which fills the wound and leave it for another day, because by this corrode all that remains of that skin.
And accordingly, repeat the process on that cloth with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if it is needed for its healing, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the aposteme contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section and scrape off all that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
But if your arteries make opposition, then do what I have recounted first of all.
And similarly do in the aposteme that is hardened by section and cure according to what we have said; and section on a hardened aposteme is even easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And some times there are certain of these apostemes which are in the head of some men with whom there is no moisture; and this cause is because you have incised upon an aposteme in the head of an old woman and then hardened that aposteme as a deaf, hard, white stone which could not be broken, and if any one should hit it with that, it would hurt.
But in other apostemes that occur on the head of children and ears, you should not follow this chapter, but rather follow the section for those who have had their ears pierced, but the section for all these is a superficial one.
And pause the piercing of those from the lower part of them, so that it may be relieved to the body of the pus in the lower parts.
And accordingly, cure those with what is needed for its healing.
Forty-second Chapter.
Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these apostemes are found in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all of this scrofula is within its own proper tunic, and just as in the nodes and apostemes of the head, just as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapidean, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not respond to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Tocament, the color of which is manifest is propitious to the color of the code, and it is spread over all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and it is not swollen, then you should incise that one with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body, along the line of .G. to the line of .B., and scrape off all that part, and extend two lips of the code with once, or with many times if you need those, just as we have said in the apostemes of the head, and extract it little by little.
And be more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust to your hand and incision, or worry the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from performing the operation, then pause in the wound, and apply a poultice of vinegar or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the acute phase of the aposteme is quieted and the wound is softened and begins to be purged. When the blood is abscessed.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And accordingly, inquire into what your lord has said indicate if there remains any cause of the other small scrofulas; therefore, incise those and cleanse those.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a great vein, then it is necessary that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots. Then it is necessary to tie that one with a doubled thread and let that one fall until it drops without causing any harm.
And accordingly, fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that one.
And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them together as soon as possible so that there remains no superfluous portion.
But if you find that there remains a superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and excise it and administer a suture and that which is said.
And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the location of its maturation, and pause the perforation at the point where the pus is lowest in the body, just as we have said.
And accordingly, administer a perforation, with poultices and remedies similar to those, in order that it may corrode what remains of the corruption. And accordingly, when you see that the wound is already cleansed, then you should cure it with ointment of flesh-generating substance until it is healed.
Forty-third Chapter.
Of the section of the pilhot of the aposteme which occurs in the groin area.
The ancients called this section in the pilhot, and none have seen it done by anyone in our land that way.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men who have scrofula, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the pilhot, because through this, there will be no help for the disease, since all the veins and main vessels of the malady are here.
But in those who have apostemes cutaneous on the mouth or groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the skin, it is necessary to use the section of pilhot to escape the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, it is necessary to incise the pilhot below three circles of the pilhot or four with a small section by latitude in that which is between two circles as much as possible, so that the section is on the cartilage, not on the bone; and this location is convenient for the section, because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are there.
And if the doctor is hesitant, it is necessary that he extend the fold of the groin with once, and accordingly, make an incision in the fold until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
And accordingly, incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified on the section of the canal by the flame which is of that essence and with water that is dissolved and by the absorption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is redeemed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the fold of the wound, and sew that alone to the cartilage.
And accordingly, administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And I, Albucasis, say that the summary of this sermon which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these apostemes have already filled the groin area of the malady, and the malady has come to death, and the air in it is dried up, and some go to incise the epigloss to make the malady breathe over the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease is consumed; and it is the maliciousness of it for three days; and then I command thus: sew up the wound, and cure that one until it is healed.
And that which I have seen through my art, is that a servant took a cote and placed it in his groin area and incised with it a part of the lung's canal, and you were called to its cure, and approached the patient as if the dying were crying out, and uncovered the wound and approached the blood which was issuing from the wound slightly.
Therefore you were confessed that it had not been incised to the vein nor guided, and the breath was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
And he did not die, but rather returned to better condition in his health within a few days.
And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the pilhot.
Forty-fourth Chapter.
Of the section on an aposteme which occurs in the groin area outside, and is called a hernia of the groin.
This aposteme is known as a hernia of the groin is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, for either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no need to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme made by a node of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it is not necessary to make a conjecture about it except in one that is small. And you should proceed with that and investigate it according to the said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it as with the nodes, and extract it with what contains it of the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then examine all his being, and accordingly cure the place where healing is needed until it is healed.
Forty-fifth Chapter.
Of the section on the species of nodes.
Of the nodes, many species and I have already spoken about all their species in the division.
And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an exitura, so that there may be no doubt.
Therefore I say that in an exitura there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is abated; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that ciphac lion which is at the proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus as if a vacuum, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary that you expose it and inquire about it at the beginning with an instrument which is called an intro-mes, according to its form as will be described in the chapter that is next.
And this is the manner of inquiring about apostemes and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid part which you find in the apostema, and you rotate those fingers in that way little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
And accordingly, lastly, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the aposteme, and accordingly, extract the intro-mes and consider what is found in its wake.
And if the fluid that has been extracted is forgotten and runs off, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other apostemes.
And if from the wake of the intro-mes there is no fluid, then you know that it is fat.
And cut above it with an incision having the form of a cross according to this form: in this way as I have taught you, and suspend it with once, and excise the core of all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times you will have to put it back together, and accordingly, you should extract it bit by bit until there is no longer any cause from it.
Therefore, if there is no longer any cause from it, little or much, the node will return to its original state.
And if you find that there remains a small part from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which contains the aposteme cautiously, and cure that one from another cure until it is healed.
And if it is a great node, then you should sew up the two lips of it and cure that one with what engenders.
But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then you should press and humbly the place of the scar that is dry and let it rest for two days or three until the wound is purged and the ebullition of blood has ceased; and accordingly return to incising what remains of the node.
Forty-sixth Chapter.
Of the forms of instruments necessary in section and perforation.
Of those which are the forms of intro-mes, and there are three species, one great, one middle-sized, and one small.
The form of the great intro-mes is this:
The form of the small intro-mes is this:
They are made of iron, with handles of wood or other materials, and with rounded ends to facilitate the instrument's insertion into apostemes.
And these are the forms of the expert instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
And there are three species, one great, one middle-sized, and one small.
The form of the great expert instrument is this:
The form of the middle-sized expert instrument is this:
The form of the small expert instrument is this:
Conveniently, they are used for those apostemes, exituras, and fistulas, and also for buboes, in order to distinguish between those that are of the bones and others caused by other reasons.
And there are made needles, large and small, with heads like great aglets to which the sheaths are sewn, and they are made of horn citron, or bone, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of horn citron.
And there are made expert instruments of black wood, which are adapted to open up the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections that are reflected into their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three species, one long, and the others middle-sized, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Form of the great expert instrument of lead:
Form of the middle-sized expert instrument of lead:
Form of the small expert instrument of lead:
The forms of the needles are of many species, one kind being simple, with only one curvature, and there are three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized.
And among them, some are made of horn, and there are three species.
And among them, some needles have two curvatures, and there are three species.
And among them, some needles have three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple needle, this:
Form of a great needle having two curvatures: Form of a middle-sized needle having two curvatures: Form of a small needle having two curvatures:
Form of a great needle having three curvatures:
Form of a middle-sized needle having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and apostemes are cut and scraped, and there are three species, one great, one middle-sized, and one small.
Form of a great scalpel:
Form of a middle-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in this manner, but rather to make a just judgment in the excoriation of the nodes, lest there be inscision of a vein or nerve, and for that the patient may be healed and attain tranquility, and thus a little peace is found in the adustion of which is sought the excoriation of the aposteme.
And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, middle-sized, and small, just like veins.
They are made of horn and resemble a ray, with which an acolymph is made.
And it is in the extremity that is punctated with a spatula hidden and in that corner go out to the outside parts and inside when you want, just as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers when piercing the apostemes and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, middle-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventoses with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: great, middle-sized, and small; these are the forms of them:
They are made of horn citron, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that you have these three species of ventoses, great, middle-sized, and small, in order to absorb the flow of blood with speed when needed, and accordingly, when first aid is not a medicine.
However, you should not use those to absorb blood everywhere in the body, and you should only use them in fleshy places, just like in the groins of the thighs and hips, and in the areolae of the breasts, and in the belly and groin areas, and similar to their own fleshy humors.
And sometimes they are made of those instruments, small and similar to scissors for flaps according to this form; by which the blood is absorbed when it is cut off through flebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Forty-seventh Chapter.
Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen as they start to be relaxed, and accordingly, the breasts are swollen, and similar to those of women, and aposteme-like, distant.
And for him who has this condition, you should incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and accordingly, excise all the excess skin, and accordingly, fill the wound with an encarnative medicine, and accordingly, adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the breast declines to its natural shape and is softened by its magnitude just like in women, then it should be divided into two parts as far as possible, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one is contained within the other until the end of each one, so that the major line contains the minor one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And accordingly, excise the core between the two lips of the wound, and remove the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders which are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the unease of the patient and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until the corrosion that remains from the grayish color is removed, and accordingly, cure that one until it is healed.
Forty-eighth Chapter.
Of the perforation of apostemes which come after the titillation.
Those apostemes that come after the titillation are of the species of scrophulas, hard ones, which contain a skin that is drawn out.
And among those are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the fluid that is in the apostema has been evacuated, then you should fill it with a piece of well-greased cloth and leave it until the next day.
And accordingly, the cloth should be left in place and cured with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
And if the aposteme is of the species of nodes or scrophulas, then you should divide it as we have said in the section on scrophulas, equally.
And if the wound is extended in such a way that it would be painful to burn, then you should administer in it a cautery according to what we have previously said.
Forty-ninth Chapter.
Of the section of apostemes that occur by artery or by vein.
When an artery is broken and the cord which is over it is consolidated, many times a post-hemorrhagic aposteme occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and aposteme are due to an artery or vein: for when the apostema is due to an artery, it becomes long and swollen in the breast of the chest; and when you compress the apostema with those very words, you will feel a stridor.
And that which is due to a vein is rounded on the surface of the chest.
And the section on this apostema is an error, and more so in those who are left with abscesses, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the chest; and it is very great, therefore its cure by iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
But on that which is due to them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should divide the section in the cord along its length; and accordingly, you should cut through the section with scissors and approach the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
And accordingly, you should tie that thread and make it pass through the other side, and tighten the artery with a double suture in two places,  which causes you to see ahead in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
And accordingly, you should push the location which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is released and the aposteme is dissolved.
And accordingly, you should administer the cure in which fire is generated until the ligaments fall off; and accordingly, you should cure that one with suitable ointments for that until it is healed.
And if the aposteme is due to section of a vein, then you should take hold of it with your hand and water as much as possible from the aposteme with the cord, and accordingly, insert the needle left of the location which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that file double so that you can extract that one from the other side, and accordingly, tie the aposteme with a good ligature according to what we have said about tying two parts together with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then accordingly, insert the needle with that thread left of all the aposteme and make the first incision with the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
And accordingly, cut the aposteme in the middle of it until when that which is in it is released, then you should incise the excess cord, and leave what is tied to it.
And accordingly, pause over the powder which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, and accordingly, administer the cure which is made with some and ointments until it is healed.
First Chapter on the Aposteme that occurs due to Torsion of Nerves.
Just as an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, so also an aposteme occurs in the nerves when it is caused by percussion or excessive labor, and similarly.
And it is made the most in the places of the assistants or anklebone, or in any place where the joints are disturbed.
And it is a great aposteme, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the major parts of the body disposed to their own kind, when it is tightened with vehemence, and one feels in oneself like a stupor.
And it is not an aposteme that grows in the breast of the body, and therefore it remains without cord, and it is hurtful to all parts and does not go to any parts before or behind.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to be treated with iron, because very little would lead to contraction.
But that which is in the head or forehead should be treated with cord and spatula. But if it is a small aposteme, then you should treat that one with poultices and abscesses.
And if it is great, then you should suspend that one with stitches, and excise it, and accordingly, stop that flow; and adjust the wound with suture, and cure that one until it is healed.
Fifty-first Chapter.
Of the Section on the Aposteme that occurs due to Childbirth, which occurs in the abdomen.
Hereafter I shall describe to some men many times in the bellies of those and in other parts of the bodies of those which are called fungals by similarity with those like fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is thick; and already their lips are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
And I myself have seen one, and in the belly of it were two theils which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them white, with fine roots.
And already their lips were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Therefore, you should incise them and bury one in a pit that weighs 18 pounds. and the other weighed 6 pounds.
And the operation in incising them is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the thiel is white, humid, with fine roots; then you should incise it with a spatula late, and be present while cauterizers are in the fire, because many times the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that one.
And if the patient is pale and tremulous, beware of incising with iron; but then take a lead thread freshly made, and tie it to that thiel, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And accordingly, adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead very much for that thiel, until it is abscessed and falls off by itself through excessive labor.
But if the thiel is of coarse roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and terror, and most especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But possible is that you incise most of it, and accordingly, cauterize that one so that it does not return.
And accordingly, cure that one until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to incise a thiel which is of dark color, little sensation, and little regard, for that one is a cancerous tumor.
And I will remember an account of cancer accordingly.
Fifty-second Chapter.
Of the Cure for Eminence of the Navel.
Eminence of the navel is caused by many reasons; either by fissures in the cicatrix which is on the abdomen, and eyes of it are torn or burst forth according to what develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery, as was said before, or by ventosity constricted in it.
But if it is due to fissure of the cicatrix and bursting forth of the membrane, then the color of the aposteme is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and accordingly, it appears in various situations. And if it is due to bursting forth of the membrane, then the situation of that one with water as we have recounted, but with a more violent diversity, and when you press that one with the threads said, it is hidden, and accordingly, it returns; and very little remains in it, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bath and violent labor.
But if it is due to humidity, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained or creased.
And if it is due to blood, then accordingly, the signs appear to decline towards blackness with that aposteme.
But if it is due to flesh nothing, then accordingly, the aposteme is great, thick and hard, and it grows in a certain quantity.
But if it is due to ventosity, then accordingly, the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the eminence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or ventosity; then you should be prohibited from curing it, because there is fear and terror alike as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about apostemes by artery and vein.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to the membrane or the skin, then you should command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and accordingly, make a sign in the circuit of all the navel, and accordingly, command him to stand forward between your hands above his belly button, and accordingly, encircle with a spatula late in the circuit of the navel over the location which you have marked with the sign; and accordingly, extend most of the aposteme to the upper parts with a thread great; and accordingly, tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or cord and the manner of tying decent.
And accordingly, cut the middle of the extended aposteme over the ligament and insert the said thread into that indicated and seek out the membrane; and if you have not found nor guarded by the ligament, then you should extract the remaining part and push the membrane to the lower parts outside the belly.
And if you have cut the membrane, then accordingly, take that one with a thread; and incise the excess parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly, surround that one with much, and accordingly, return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the aposteme in a cross-like manner, so that they penetrate; and accordingly, strengthen the aposteme in four parts above the needles.
And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the location until the stretched skin relaxes and falls off by itself; or incise that one when it is softened and can be peeled away, and accordingly, cure that one with water as needed, until it is healed.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then accordingly, you should conquer the aposteme as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find there, and accordingly, cure that one with water as needed and consolidate the location.
Fifty-third Chapter.
Of the Cure for Cancer.
We have already said in the division, of what kind of cancer it is and how it is treated with medicines, and that it is a savior in its cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated through carelessness and caution in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, such as breast cancer or womb cancer and to their likeness of members allotted to remove all that, and most especially when it is beginning small.
But when it is ancient and great, you should not dare to touch it, because I have not seen anyone heal from it nor has anyone else seen another case, nor is there any precedent for reaching that.
And the operation in that case is when it is allotted as we have said, which is to precede and leave the patient and purge with black bile some times, and accordingly, sign him, if there is a manifest repulsion.
And accordingly, prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for the operation, and accordingly, prohibit the use of those threads which are needed for that; and accordingly, concave from all parts with a good cord excitation so that there remains no cause for the roots of it. And accordingly, let the blood flow and do not abscess it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the gross blood with your hand or with an instrument which is at your disposal among the instruments.
But if there is great contrariety of blood incised from the vein or artery, then accordingly, cauterize that one until the flow of blood is ceased, and accordingly, cure that one with another cure until it is healed.
Fifty-fourth Chapter.
Of the Cure for Hydrocephalus.
We have already recounted in the division, the species of hydrocephalus caused by water and the signs of each species, and the cure for it with medicines.
And that one which is cured with iron is only the species of athleta alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of tympanic or to the species of hypsarchus, for this is deadly.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrocephalus tympanic with medicines and not confirmed your medication, then accordingly, consider, for if the patient has already been weakened by it, or is suffering from another disease or hydrocephalus, just as if it is in the head or chest and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate it with iron, for fear is over that.
But if you find the patient to be of great virtue and with no other disease but hydrocephalus alone, and not a child or an old person, then accordingly, the manner of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to it accordingly by expressing the belly of it with your own hand, filling the water into the part left of the pentynal, and accordingly, take a spatula with spines according to this form:
with two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity just like a spatula; but however, be in it some smallness gradually, by reason that in the operation with that one you do not pass into the membrane, and lead that one.
And accordingly, consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from one of the membranes, because then you should at that section remove yourself from the navel by the quantity of three times to the parts left, on the right side of it above the pentynal.
But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to disease of the liver, then accordingly, your section will be on the left side of the navel by three times.
And if the generation of it is due to melancholy, then accordingly, your section will be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be above the ribcage on which the patient lies, in order that the excesses do not flow to that location freely.
And accordingly, perforate with the instrument all the cord, and accordingly, insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the cord and the siphon, and you excise that one; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or thereabout.
And accordingly, perforate the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the location where you want to find it, and it is the location of water. And accordingly, extract that one and insert an instrument with which this is the form: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of iron or of lead lion, at which the lower part is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is incised according to the manner of a feather, just as I have said:
And on the uppermost part of it is a shell, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that one will suddenly descend upon the instrument, so as to evacuate from the water in equal proportion, for if you evacuate more than what is needed at that hour, the patient may soon die by resolution of their animal spirit, or you may cause harm to them which is close to death.
But evacuate from that one according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's virtue, of the pulse of it, and of the goodness of it.
And accordingly, extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it to be retained because then it is being held back by the cord which retains the hole that is on the cicatrix of which I have said to you that you should perforate that one according to this manner.
And accordingly, repeat the instrument at another day if the patient tolerates this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do so for some days on account of fear, and beware of error until there remains only a little water.
But if you fear for the patient and leave a great quantity of water, then accordingly, cure that one by burial in hot sand, and mix it with sour wine and let it stay at the sun's warmth for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the gallbladder and liver accordingly, with the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in this which comes before.
Fifty-fifth Chapter.
Of the Cure for Children Whose Bladders Do Not Perforate.
Sometimes some of the children are born with the bladder of their mother's womb and the head of their mixture not perforated (or is a small hole or not in its place).
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize with perforation of it as soon as it is born with a spatula very fine according to this form:
And accordingly, pause in the hole a small clamp of lead and tie it, and let it be for three days or for four times.
And when they wish to urinate, it will be remade and harnessed; and accordingly, return that one.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not let it close.
But that one from which the hole is small should be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are affected with this, which is because of these, that one who is born and grows is at the end of the head of the urethra, so that it cannot urinate to the lower parts, until it raises the urethra with its own hand to the upper parts; and it is not a generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother's womb according to rectitude, and it is a bad illness indeed.
And the manner of the operation in this is that the patient should be bent over their own back, and accordingly, extend the head of the urethra with your left hand with a violent extraction, and incise the head of the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as one would incise with a feather, or if you remove some part, so that the middle of it will resemble the head of the urethra and the hole will fall into its middle place according to what is needed.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times this happens; and pause yourself at the location where you incise the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Fifty-sixth Chapter.
Of the Phimosis Which Occurs in the Prepuce at the Head of the Urethra and Corruption, Blackness, and Adherence of the Prepuce at the Head of the Urethra.
Many times this phimosis occurs in the urethra and is an excessive growth of flesh.
And one of them is malignant, and the other is not.
Not-malignant, requires that you suspend with a thin thread and excise it until all the flesh is removed; and accordingly, pause over that part submerged in Egyptian ointment; and accordingly, cure it with divine oil until it is healed.
And if the phimosis is malignant, of bad color, then accordingly you must administer cauterization according to the incision of it and the ratio of it.
But if the phimosis is in the prepuce of the head of the urethra not circumcised, and one part of the phimosis is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then accordingly you must excise the phimosis which is inside first until it is consolidated; and then you will cure that outside, for when you cure it together with the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And already it happens in the genitals and in the prepuce blackness and corruption, therefore it is necessary that you cover all this which has already been denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or which has already corrupted; and accordingly, apply a liniment on top of it with honey, which has been mixed with the meal of scoria of millet and of errors trampled and crushed.
And accordingly, cure that one with another cure until it is healthy.
But if there is excessive bleeding, then accordingly administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
because the cauterizing juice is at two dispositions together, that is, to bleeding and to the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely at once, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert into the meat of the prepuce a lead cannula so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the urethra (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose prepuce is sound and no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to excise those things exactly, then accordingly you must excise with a spatula some cause of the head of the urethra and the prepuce, and thus is why the prepuce, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety little by little.
And accordingly, separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thread so fine that it is already moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
And accordingly, be cured with a gentle remedy until it is consolidated.
Fifty-seventh Chapter.
Of the Circumcision of Children and the Cure for that Which Occurs in Them Due to Circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but rather, since it is our operation and our will, and its purpose is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the better operation and way of least harm, losing sight of health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not prescribe circumcision in any of their free works, for they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why you have found that most of the artists and barbers use to circumcise and cleanse with novacula and torores; and they use a thread with a needle and incision with the fingernail.
And I have already forbidden all these ways and did not find better cleansing with forceps, with thread and needle that in cleansing like the fingernail, because many times you have found the cord above, because the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and remains the tonic more loose, and soon it is forced to another incision and certain pain. And in the cleansing that is made by aphthas, and is digressive, of which the bakers use, it is not secure to make an incision at the extremity of the male member, because soon it will enter into the groove of it.
But in the operation with a fingernail, soon iron will obstruct and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
But the cleansing that is done with forceps and threads with a needle, the goodness, experimentally discovered by me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness above is like the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, and incise accordingly according to a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the needle with a figure containing the cord of the urethra from all parts, with which there is no error whatsoever.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should cause the child to be in a state of slight numbness, if it understands a little bit, so that you do not make more than just guide the needle into its urethra as much as possible, and let it stay there until the next day.
And accordingly, make that child happy in all that manner which is possible to you as much as it receives its intelligence. And accordingly, make that child stay between your hands very well prepared and not at all frightened; and conceal the forceps in your hand or let them lie on your foot, so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
And accordingly, insert your hand into the urethra and blow on the cord, and pull that one until it reaches the head of the urethra, and accordingly, cleanse that which is attached to it in a sordid manner.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing, this is the shape:
Should be the outer tips not cutting and the other ones cutting, so that there is no stick of the key, and should be the length of both edges as much as the length of two handles evenly.
But the error in cleansing is that soon you will escape the entire intrinsic cord or a part of it through incision.
Therefore, you should stretch that one with your hour and your fingernail in front of the wound's apostema at the location, and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then accordingly extract it with a thread and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the apostema remains behind the urethra, then accordingly you should leave it until the apostema is cauterized, and excise that one with facility, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the urethra, for it will not tolerate this.
And therefore, cure that one with the water which consolidates the wound with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised with the cord according to measure, and obeys the parts above, this will not hurt at all.
And therefore, cure that one with the water which we have said until it is healed.
Fifty-eighth Chapter.
Of the Cure for Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made through fear or pain or congealed blood, or through pressure or fleshiness, and similar to those we have said of the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, and the cause of it is violent on the patient, then accordingly you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be a subtle lion's claw, like a goose quill with subtlety of length in similarity to a palm and half, with a fine thread at its tip.
And the manner of extracting urine with that is to take a double thread and insert it into the extremity of the lana or cotone for good binding; and then you will put the extremities of the thread into the part behind the ciringua, and incise with forceps if there is any superfluous cause in the thread, but introduce it into the canula with vehemence And accordingly, put the ciringua in order with border and album of honey.
And thus let the patient sit on a stool, and envelop the bladder of him with oil of olive, and water and aqua.
And accordingly, introduce the ciringua with facility into the root of the urethra; and accordingly, double the urethra above at the part of the abdomen; and accordingly, push the ciringua into that one, and accordingly, push it until it reaches the bladder, and so the patient will be brought to the cause, and not made in this way according to this order, but rather the meat in which goes to twisting.
And accordingly, stretch the thread with the linen little by little, because the urine will saturate the linen.
And accordingly, extract that and make it for urine cure, and use the ciringua, do not cease to do so and use the ciringua until the bladder is evacuated and the patient attains relief.
Nineteenth Chapter.
Of the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clamp-cedra and similar instruments which are in accordance with this.
When ulceration or apostema occurs in the bladder, or congealed blood is present there, or it is narrowed by pressure, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then accordingly it should be made with an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
but in the extremity of it, it is soundless, that is to say, it is closed. And in that one are three holes: two on one side, just as often times.
In the beginning it is a concave place, in which water is poured, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when some cause is drawn from it with the humidities, it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with water it should be drawn out, and when it is long, as the clampcedra does, which is filled with naptha in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to procure humidities in the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is poured above, because the humidity is drawn out into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And accordingly, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the urethra, according to what we have recommended in the ciringua; and accordingly, pour in the humidity with water, because that humidity comes to the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
Form of the Subtle Catheter by which the Bladder is Catheterized, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, the head of which is similar to a small feather, and behind it there is a thread-like ligament.
And accordingly, take the bladder of motion, and put in it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and accordingly, tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and heat up that humidity over the fire.
And accordingly, insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
And accordingly, press your hand on the bladder with the humidity and stretch down into it until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then accordingly take a bag of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that one all around its circumference; and accordingly, insert a strong thread into those holes, just as they are revolved; and accordingly, add the circle just as it is added also, so that you pour into that which you want of the humidities, oils and waters.
And accordingly, tie that one to the instrument and do with it just as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Sixtieth Chapter.
Of the Extraction of Fear.
We have already said in the division the species of fear and its cure with medicines, and the difference between fear generated in the lungs and fear generated in the bladder, and its signs.
And we have said the fear in which cutting operation is made with hand, and section.
And the fear generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
And you narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that the fear generated in the bladder is mostly seen in children; and its signs are that the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in it like sand; and the patient feels their urethra, and often times they cry out, and accordingly is dressed; and with this, you see for yourself how these things come about.
And it is laughable to see the healing of children from that until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. But in the young ones, it is milder because it is among them.
And of that from which fear is greater and cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that one to cleanse the patient with a catheter which extracts all the fissure that is in their gutters; for that fissure sometimes prevents the entry of fear into the bladder.
And accordingly, the patient should be pressed with their own weight and be compressed and tightened in such a way that fear descends to the bottom of the bladder, or else it jumps from one place to another.
And accordingly, make that one sit between your most prepared hands, and the most of it are left in its things, so that the bladder is made to decline into the parts behind.
And accordingly, take care of that one and all that is outside.
Therefore, if you feel fear in the space, then accordingly you should sit down immediately with section upon it.
And if it is not entirely gone, then accordingly you should take some oil and anoint your left hand with it, if the patient is a child, or a little oil if they are a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus. And take care of the fear until it stays behind your said indication. And accordingly, convert that one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And accordingly, press upon that one with your said indication, and push it out into the parts outside the place from which you took section.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their right hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs above into the parts with their left hand, and with their other hand to relax the cord which is behind the legs, in the part where the section is being made.
And accordingly, insert the spatulum, as follows is its form: and cut in it as far as the distance between the anus and the legs, not in the middle location, but before the left side of the cleft; and make the section on that fear and your said indication be in the anus, and make it a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and behind tight according to the quantity that you have extracted from the fear as possible, and not greater, because then the pressure would compress your said indication which is in the anus, and it would be forgotten with difficulty.
And know that from the fear is some which has an angle and corners, for which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And from that one, there is a part resembling a grain of flint, which is rounded and made for easier extraction.
Therefore, if it is that one with angles and corners, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not like that, then accordingly you should gently press upon it, or that you stretch upon it with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be as a file with which you stretch upon fear, and do not remove from it; or that you insert behind it a subtle instrument with curved extremity.
But if you cannot upon it, then accordingly you should enlarge the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off in strength with vitriol thrice strained.
But if the fear is more than one, then accordingly at first you should guide your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and accordingly insert upon it; and accordingly guide a little further ahead; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
And if the fear is very great, then accordingly ignorance is that you insert that one with great section, for it happens to the patient either death or confusion of the continued distillation of urine, so that the place is not entirely consolidated.
But manage expulsion from it until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture of it with forceps until it comes out in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the sap of aloe and the blood of dragon, and strengthen that one. And pause over that cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in rosy oil and water, so that the suppuration may be checked.
And accordingly, repose the patient on their back, and do not release the bandage for three days.
And when you have released that one, bathe the wound with water and some oil, and accordingly cure it with dayphonic ointment and diabolic ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound an apostema occurs, which is cautious and corroding, and from it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder with urine, and by that the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the efflux of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said indication into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
And accordingly, wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all species, with that which is needed for the cure until it is healed.
And take care in all hours of the entire cure that you look after both the wounds and adjust the medicines which are paused over the place.
And if the fear is small and is in the meat of the urethra, and it is stuck in there, and urination is prohibited, then accordingly cure that one with what you previously recommended before reaching section, for many times this cure will be accused of section; and now I have tried this, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron alfelut, the form of which is as follows:
with a triangular extremity, sharp, stuck into a stick.
And accordingly, take a thread and tie it to the urethra behind the fear, so that it does not return to the bladder.
And accordingly, insert the iron into the urethra, perforating with ease until the perforator reaches that fear. And accordingly, rotate the perforator with your hand in that fear little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make it pass to the other side penetrate; for then the urine is soon absorbed.
And accordingly, press your hand upon that which remains of the fear from the part outside of the urethra, for that is twisted, and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not suitable for you due to some cause which prohibits it from that, then accordingly tie a thread below the fear, and another thread above the fear. And accordingly, encircle the fear in that urethra between two ligatures. And accordingly, extract that one. And accordingly, release the ligature and purify the congealed blood which is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the fear, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligament above, for when the thread is released close to the extraction of the fear, the cord returns to its place and covers the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above, that you raise the cord to the upper parts, or else you should return your said indication and cover the wound as we have said.
Sixtieth Chapter.
Of the Extraction of Fear in Women.
Fear in women is rarely generated.
But if fear occurs in some of those, then accordingly the cure is difficult and prohibited by many manners.
One of them is that the woman very quickly becomes shamefaced.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe if she has been deceived by her husband when he is chaste, or is one of those women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with my hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section on fear in women is far from the location of the fear, so you need a deep section, and in it there is fear.
But if necessity provokes you to this, then accordingly it is necessary that you take a woman who is well known and not easily found.
But if you are deprived of that one, then accordingly look for another who is quiet and subtle, or present a mature woman well-versed in the nature of women, or a woman who has been trained in this art apart from the art.
Therefore, present that one and command them to do everything you will tell them, from the inquisition of fear to the beginning; which cause is that they look if the woman is shamefaced, then accordingly it is necessary that they put their said indication into her anus and seek out the fear.
Therefore, if you find that one, cut it off below your said indication, and then command them to insert upon it.
But if she is not shamefaced, then accordingly command the matron to insert her said indication into the privates of the patient and inquire about the fear, since she pauses her left hand over the bladder, and compress that one with good compression.
Therefore, if you find that one, then accordingly it is necessary to gradually push her through the orifice of the bladder into the parts behind with the summit of her virtue until she reaches the root of the cleft.
And accordingly, insert upon that one the opposition of the greatest part of the privates, to the root of the cleft of some part being in a position and centring the fear in that part, and the said indication not being removed from the fear cut off below.
And the section should be slight at first; and accordingly, insert a ray upon that section, and if you feel the fear, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the fear will be extracted from that.
And know that the species of fear are many: for some are slight and great, and lion-like and rough, and long and rounded, and have ridges.
Therefore, you know how many species there are of it for this reason that you signify on that which you will.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the place with vitriol thrice strained and let it be for an hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
And make sure you prepare with you the instruments which are said in the extraction of fear in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the instrument that is inserted, then accordingly you pause powder on the place and strengthen that with powders and strictures descending, and do not iterate this; and leave the fear and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And accordingly, cure the wound.
Therefore, when the acuity of blood is ceased after some days, and the place becomes quiet, then accordingly you return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
Sixty-second Chapter.
Of Section on Hernia Accursed.
Hernia accursed is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the cord of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared in the part of the humor, so that it is covered with another humor; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not this but rather a kind of tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, so that it pours out this material into them; and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, for its color is declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or it is black feculent, or white watery, and it is this that is most.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is so: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then accordingly the apostema is rounded declining a little towards length thus resembling a figure of humor, and appears the genitals, for the humidity contains that in all part.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then accordingly the apostema is rounded with a part of humor and by that one estimates it to be another humor.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white membrane, then accordingly it is caught below the sentiment.
And when you want to know the cognition of the color of the moisture, then accordingly you examine the color of the moisture in the apostema with the surrounding area of which the form is preceded; and according to this that is situated in the vestige of the surrounding area, judge what it is deduced from.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then accordingly it is necessary that we command the patient to be flayed and botomed if this is possible for you, and fill his body full.
And accordingly, be reposeful on your back on some cause a little above, and pause below with many cloths.
And accordingly, set yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, who should stretch his arm to one of two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the miraculous wound in the belly.
And accordingly, take a spatula late and cut the cord of the genitals from the middle to the length, so that it is close to the navel.
And accordingly, make the section according to rectangular equality, at a distance from the line that you should follow along the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
And accordingly, scrape it away, and observe, and take care that you do not insert it; and your scraping with which you scrape it away by part below so that it is suspended in the humor most and subtly scrutinize the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
And accordingly, pierce the white membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And accordingly, separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals comprehending, and insert the membrane in that manner which is possible for you. And accordingly, insert that one with its totality or in pieces, and mostly your subtle parts, for if you do not scrutinize the insertion of it exquisitely, there is no certain guarantee that the water will not return.
But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its cord in the time of your operation, then accordingly when you have completed the section of the membrane, return to the inside of it, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suturing, and accordingly cure that one as well as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then accordingly it is necessary that you cut out the vessels which are sour to the suspender, and extract the humor, and accordingly cure that one with what we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to be one operation, then you do it.
And accordingly, you wash the blood, and immerse in the sections wool submerged in oil or red oil; and pause outside another wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread that one over two genitals and the miraculous wound in the belly; and pause above folded cloths and powder, and tie those above with a knot according to this form:
and accordingly, there are pressed two cloths and they are filled with wool carded according to this likeness; and the extremities are made with those which are bound with cloth or wet wool, and they are added with stricture in the codpiece of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the cleft to the back, and the other takes at the part of the navel, and two extremities on two cresses below and two extremities above on two groins, and all the structure is adjusted in the codpiece of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with caustic in place of section with iron; and it is that you take caustic cutlery subtle and insert it into the cord of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recounted until the white membrane containing the water is revealed, and then you take caustic according to this form: and it is gathered in Greek letter.
And accordingly, pierce into that membrane, and ignite until all the humidity is exhausted.
And accordingly, extend the membrane with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with caustic subtile ignited; and insert that one according to what is possible for you until it eradicates all of it; and take care not to let the water touch the fire.
And you know that this operation is more safe and more lengthy of blood flow, and better than the operation with section.
But if you feel contrariety of apostema in the hour of section or in the hour of cauterization, or blood flow, then accordingly it is necessary that you cure which contrariety does to you by this means, with the care which corresponds to him according to what is said.
But if the patient is pale and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then accordingly administer perforation according to what we have said here; and it is when you are certified by this that you know, according to what we have said about the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Then accordingly you should make the patient sit on some elevated platform, and accordingly pierce the apostema in the lowest part of him with a spatula late, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And make it wide so that all the water is drained out.
And accordingly, pause on the location of the knot and tie it and leave it so that the remaining water flows out. And accordingly, cure that one until the wound is healed.
But if there is contrariety to the egress of water in that hour, then you should pierce it: and this is not done unless by this reason, because the white panniculus at the orifice of the wound causes contrariety and prohibits the exit of water; accordingly, it is necessary that you put into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the position of the wound a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and is aggregated accordingly after about two months or so; and as it is aggregated, then it should be pierced according to that manner, because the patient will thus pass his days.
Sixty-third Chapter.
Of Section on Carnous Hernia and its Cure.
You know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of being lost through destruction in the major dispositions; for which my sight has seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
And you are well-remembered to operate in that and the species of apostemes.
So I say that the apostemes are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made so by many causes: or by acute and severe superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by blows.
And it is the color of the aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a grave aposteme.
And very little is the aposteme calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sentiment to it.
And sometimes it is made by concretion of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels so that already the recollection of it is perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is due to inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when you compress it with those said ties; and there is no need for it to touch.
But that which is due to inflammation of veins is not dispersed from it for any cause, even if compressed with the said ties.
And it is possible that on this species, a section be made and on the other fleshy parts; and it is that you insert the cord of the genitals, and accordingly extend the humor to the upper parts, and extract that from the white membrane, and deliver the suspensor of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensor more than you deliver it from all part of the parts of the humor.
Therefore, if the humor is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then accordingly it is necessary that you extract the humor and insert that.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the membrane or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert that one by rounded insertion.
But if there is natural flesh behind the adhesion, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert all that which is of him, and extract the humor thus as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then accordingly fill the wound with wool impregnated in red oil and wine; and accordingly cure that one with another care until it is healed.
Sixty-fourth Chapter.
Of the Cure of Hernia which is of Vine.
Vit is an aposteme wrapped in some wrapping resembling a shoot with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to move, exercise, and walk.
And in the cure of this disease it is by fear due to that which is preceded by recollection.
However, it is necessary that we say operation in that according to what I did with the first ones.
And I say that it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated platform; and accordingly, pinch the suspensor of the testicles at the left side; and accordingly, take hold of the cord of the genitals with the said ties and vessels which are proved to be tender to the verge; and have another minister who you, and stretch those ones with great extension.
And accordingly, insert by spatula late and make a cross section in the right of the vessels so that the vessels are uncovered.
And accordingly, scrape off all part as we have said in extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And accordingly, put an awl in those places where it is faithful double, and tie that one at the first of the locations where Vit occurs, and tie that other time at the last of them. And accordingly, insert those in the middle location by right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And accordingly, cure the wound with the care of other wounds in which you wish to be born and generated by so that the vessels may not flow from one of two genitals, for it is not evil because of this.
But if Vit occurs in all the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that either the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this are blocked with the vessels, so that they may be deprived of all nourishment by the obstruction of the vessels, and be putrid, or that it happens because there is no further use with those.
Sixty-fifth Chapter.
Of the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
The advent of this hernia is due to section that extends in the membrane stretched over the belly from the sides of the miraculous wound of the abdomen, so that the intestines being torn away fall into one of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the membrane or of excess of fluid, and occurs in these two species due to many causes: or percussion, or by blow, or by shout, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by resemblance.
And the sign of this is when it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme that grows within the ventral area, because the membrane compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it occurs due to section of the membrane, because at first it causes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an aposteme that appears differently below the apparent cord given off, and this is due to effusion of the intestine, and the body of it in the parts outside the membrane.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine's cloth, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia cirrhal.
And sometimes it is caused by ventosity, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal fissure, and here it is retained, and it is in this great perniciousness of the patient, and sometimes it causes evil pain and mostly when it is pressed.
And in the cure of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the caustic in that one.
And the manner of the operation of that one is to command the patient to turn out the intestine with his own hand to the outer parts of his own conquest if he obeys his returnment, and accordingly it should be inserted over his own back between your own shoulders, and lift up the legs of him.
And accordingly, straighten the cord which binds the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and insert the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly, put it in two lips of the section, according as you need to open the section with those.
And if the section is done according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget about that one's humor.
And accordingly, scrape off that membrane which is below the cord of the testicles, until the white hard membrane is revealed from each part.
Then accordingly you put your said tie in that which secures the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane and the one that is below the cord of humor, and between the second membrane, and absolve with that adherence which is in the back part of the humor.
And accordingly, take hold of the cord of the testicles with your left hand and extend the white membrane on its side, and lift up the humor with the membrane to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
And search for those ties which make sure that there is no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard membrane. But if you find any cause in it, then accordingly you will pinch that one below to the belly.
And accordingly, insert into the part below of the cord of the testicles by section of which blood and pus should flow as we have recounted in this place that we have said.
And accordingly, administer wool soaked in oil, and pause on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recounted (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said should be done with caution to prevent flux of blood, for many times those things occur) and let the binding settle until it falls by itself.
But if the caustic of that one is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be applied, and pause over it until it falls as we have said.
And accordingly, cure the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.
Sixty-sixth Chapter.
Of Ventral Hernia.
In this hernia, it is not seen that there has been any boldness in the cure of it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made as we have recounted in the hernia which is with vinegar; which is that you tie the vessels accordingly to the section on that one with facility of it; and accordingly, cut off in the middle place around the aposteme with water which works that, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Sixty-seventh Chapter.
Of the Disruption which is made in the Angulations.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the angulations as we have said, and emerges from the place.
And there is no need for the genitals to have any cause of the intestines at the genitals; and if there is, it is rare; and returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged in this way, a fissure is adjusted in the membrane so that the intestine descends into the membrane; and this occurs because of the extension of the membrane which is in the angulations as we have said, which cause is because the membrane is stretched and the place becomes apostematized and emerges.
And the cure of it is with a caustic as was preceded by the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your own shoulders, and accordingly, cuts off the place of the rupture of the apostemes emerging by section through the width according to the quantity of three ties.
And accordingly, strengthen the white membrane that is below the cord until it is revealed.
And accordingly, take a ray and pause it on the elevated place of the membrane, and press that one against the womb of the belly.
And accordingly, close the two elevated places on the extremity of the ray of the membrane, and adjust them with a suture one to another.
And accordingly, extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the membrane completely, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause as you should know to be in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And accordingly, cure that one with the care of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the membrane is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Sixty-eighth Chapter.
Of the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is feared the reckoning of it.
Therefore it is necessary for that one who is treating the case to make the patient lie on his back, and insert all the cord which has been softened over the natural cord; and accordingly, adjust two lips with a suture.
And if you wish, cut off in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
And accordingly, insert between the sutures; and accordingly, cure through the cure of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Sixty-ninth Chapter.
Of Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it has been granted to me to recall it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two manners, of which one is because of the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, so that he may know the cure of it which occurs; and the other manner is that many times we have needed castration of other beasts for our uses through those animals, such as mares, oxen, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: or by attrition, or by incision by section.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie in cold water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang. And accordingly, take those with your own hand until they are resolved and do not appear to leave any touch.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And accordingly, tie the suspenders, and insert one section over each humor until two humors process.
And accordingly, insert those so that you will have whatever is excoriated. And do not leave any cause on the membrane of the cord, but only the subtle membrane which is above the vessels.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by attrition, because attrition gently leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires to copulate.
And accordingly, cure the wound until it is healed.
Seventieth Chapter.
Of the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: one is when a figure appears in that space which is between the cord of testicles, in which there are two testicles as if they were joined together like a woman's genitals.
And sometimes from that one flows urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women it is a species: and it is that the woman's clitoris above the pubes is like two male testicles, a little bit small, and at the top part, just as the male urethra and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: two of men and one of women's. And it is that you must insert those adjusted flesh parts so that they flee from the pressure of that one, and accordingly, cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Twenty-first Chapter.
Of Lentigo and Eminent Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Lentigo is very slightly adjusted according to natural causes, so that it is stretched and made visible; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and penetrates into the coitus.
Therefore, you must take the superfluity of lentigo with your own hand or with a needle and insert it.
And do not leave any residue in the insertion, especially in the region of the razor, so that it does not provoke a flow of blood.
And accordingly, cure that one with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the great one until it fills that one, and very slightly emerges at the top parts as if from a hen (and for this reason we will also call this "disease of the tail"); therefore, you must insert it just like inserting lentigo, and cure that one until it is healed.
Seventy-second Chapter.
Of the Cure of Eczema.
Eczema is when a woman's clitoris is not perforated or is only slightly pierced. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not well adjusted or by subtle membrane or thick skin.
And it is caused either in the abdomen of the great one, or in the sides of it, or in the uppermost part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits copulation, pregnancy, and childbirth, and very slightly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observing the metrona, if the swelling is apparent, then pronounced; but if not apparent, then accordingly you should search for it with the ties or with the ray.
But if swelling is caused by subtle membrane, and it appears on both lips, then accordingly you should cut and break that one.
And you pause over the two lips with powder, and accordingly pause the threads indicated on both sides.
And the woman should be on her back, her arms extended, and accordingly extend both lips with force until that subtle membrane is broken and the swelling is opened.
And accordingly, take wool and dip it in oil and pause that one on the location, and keep the patient at home for a day so that the inserted location is not consolidated.
But if the membrane is thick and dense, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert it with spatula or with myrtle leaves.
But if the swelling is due to inflammation, then accordingly suspend that one with a needle, and insert it.
And be familiar with the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as ahaemia, blood of dragon, and enses, adjusted to the album of urine.
And accordingly, administer a leaden cannula of ample size so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
And keep that one for several days and administer lukewarm water.
And accordingly, be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and accordingly it is necessary that you insert according to this manner. But if it is due to gangrenous apostemes, then do not make any opposition with iron in any way regarding the gangrenous aposteme which is in the mother.
Seventy-third Chapter.
Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids, Tumors and Red Boils that occur in the Clitoris of Women.
Hemorrhoids are a kind of swelling of the orifices of many veins, until from those veins there flows blood continuously; and as hemorrhoids become old and their throats are formed.
And I have already said in the division of these species and their signs, and I will say here which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and throats when they are in the abdomen of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then accordingly in those there is no cure with iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that can be cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and accordingly extend the throat with forceps or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And accordingly powderize over those veins the flows of blood from one of the powders that are inserted without biting, just like acaena and similar to those.
And accordingly, apply pressure with her feet for one hour, and accordingly pause that one in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then accordingly make that one to cease in a decoction of samphire and scorzonera roots and gallnuts and similar things.
And accordingly, take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a poultice with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is stopped, it's good; and otherwise, make adhere with two poultices, and on the nipples without scarring.
And accordingly, take wool and submerge that one in the juice of colicandro or in the juice of arnoglossa or in the juice of guarravier mixed with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and accordingly cure the location with ointment until it is healed.
And cure that one until it is healed.
Seventy-fourth Chapter.
Of the Perforation of Accidental Emission in the Mother.
Many species of accidental apostemes occur in the mother, such as gangrene and apostematic lithotomy and ulcers and hubbub and herpetomenes and fistulous hemorrhoids and ravenous and throat and other apostemes. And I have already said these diseases and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division.
And it is necessary that you say in this treatise of gangrenous aposteme which occurs in the mother when it is one of those apostemes that are cured by means of surgery, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is done with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the gangrenous aposteme in its initial stage is sharp with percussion and pulse and fever, and if it becomes inflamed and if one feels sensation on that location, then do not cut with perforation of iron, but cure that one with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And accordingly it is necessary that you make the woman lie on a pillow with two pillows; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the lower part of the belly, and her arms be expanded, and pause her hands below her nails, and tie each one with a bandage to water as convenient.
And accordingly the midwife should follow the right direction and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the mother is opened, in the form which will come forth from those causes that will be appropriate.
And accordingly when you want to administer this instrument, make it so that the ray is applied to the abdomen of the mother of the woman, and what enters into the mother from the instrument should not be more than the abdomen of the mother and guide the malady. But if the instrument is larger than the abdomen of the mother, then accordingly it is necessary that you sprinkle powder on the texture of the abdomen of the mother so that it prevents the entrance of any instrument into the abdomen of the mother.
And accordingly, you should pause the pivot that runs in the instrument from above and below, and the one who ministers should hold the instrument and turn the pivot until the orifice of the mother is opened.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then accordingly it is necessary that you cut off that part from the head of the instrument with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then accordingly it is necessary that you pause in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil which has some stinging properties; and pause the pressure on the section in the abdomen of the mother.
And pause above the mother's back and on the pubic area a clean wool submerged in water in which mauve flowers have been added.
And accordingly it is cured in two days with ointment which corresponds to that until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother is washed and the wound in this way that it is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly with water in which rue or Aristolochia longa has been added, and accordingly returns to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the mother's abdomen, then accordingly it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of that one with iron, having cured that one with water as we have said in the division.
Seventy-fifth Chapter.
To teach midwives in what manner they should be medicated when the bodies are sick according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman expelling her contents at the lower part and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is relaxed because what is coming out from her is the part, and hasten the delivery of the fetus, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the delivery of the child on its head, and the umbilical cord suspended or pending from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the belly of the child be compressed so that the fetus descends slightly, and when they come out on its head, they are delivered to it, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
But that which is another part is non-natural and not to be trusted, for when the fetus is delivered with its feet first and the child's body is delivered in front of its head and its feet, one hand or at the foot... or is delivered with the head of the child and one hand or at the belly of the child, and very rarely it is turned on its back, and resembling the figures of non-natural childbirth.
Therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing you all the figures of those, and what power is in them, so that they may be significant by this and stand on that.
When the child is born on its head by natural extraction, and it is vehement over the woman and made to part with difficulty, and sometimes the virtue of the woman is already debilitated, then accordingly make that one cease, or what women have, and evaporate the menses with fenugreek and humectant oils.
And accordingly insert the midwife between her said small spatula and a slit in that one, or cut that one with its own nail until it flows forth what is in her of humidity. And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
But if it doesn't descend, then accordingly the woman should be anointed with mummy of papyrus and mummy of fenugreek mixed with camomile.
And accordingly command her to be anointed with it, and accordingly the anointing should be compressed and make that one sneeze with conditions; and take away her mouth and nose from her for an hour, because the fetus will soon forget about it.
And if two of the fetus's hands are forgotten at the beginning, then accordingly you should reduce those with small ease little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then accordingly pause the woman on a pillow and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the pillow on the earth; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the hands are not returned and the fetus dies, then accordingly insert those and extract the remnant of the fetus or tie its body to her hand with cloth and extract that one with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
When the fetus is born on its feet, then accordingly you should push those inwards, and accordingly turn the fetus little by little, and accordingly bring one foot of it and stretch those little by little.
But when they are born into the arms, then accordingly you should command her to expel, and make that one sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
And if it is not forgotten according to what we have recounted, then accordingly you should return the fetus little by little until it pauses in its natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with a lighter delivery.
And if it is prohibited according to all that we have recounted, then accordingly take mummy of alta and dissolved gum, and strike the whole in the mortar with good striking, and accordingly line up with water the woman's menses, at the lowest part of her belly. And accordingly make that one cease in hot water, until it achieves the hypochondria.
And when the parts below are relaxed, then accordingly make her take a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that one for her. And when she has taken the sub-fumigation for an hour, then accordingly make her lie on a pillow, and accordingly make that one sneeze and stretch out her mouth, and take away from that, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
Delivery of the Fetus Lying Transverse with One of Its Hands Hanging Down. Be gentle in reducing the woman's hand, but if you cannot reduce that one, then accordingly lift the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then accordingly make her lie on the bed, and conceive the woman's arms with a violent concussion, and accordingly administer those remedies which you and we have recounted from mummy.
And if the childbirth is over, then accordingly make her lie on a pillow, and accordingly study the reduction of the hand, and bring forth the fetus according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Delivery of the Fetus with its hands spread out and the woman's flesh on both sides of her mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and accordingly turn it little by little, and make it easy for that one.
And when it is equalized, and accordingly pause on the menses of that one with what we have recounted from oils and mummy.
And accordingly command her to cough little by little, and when you have finished that, then accordingly make her lie on a pillow and command her to incline herself over the right side, and accordingly command her to be compressed; and make that one sneeze with conditions. Exit of the Prepared Fetus Above the Side.
When the child is born in a terrifying manner according to this method, consider, and accordingly you should insert the second finger with your nail into that one until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of her, then accordingly you should insert that one from the umbilicus, so that it may not be retained and die.
And accordingly push the fetus into the lower parts until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and if God so wills, it will be forgotten with a lighter delivery.
Exit of Twins or Many Fetuses. Know that twins are often born in sets of two or three, and sometimes even four, but this is rare and should not happen; but there are causes that are against nature, and do not live.
And in those cases, whether they are multiple or not, one second fetus, and they are separated by ciphac, distinguish those into the ligament at the umbilicus of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten like this, as if it were one fetus for a lighter delivery, and sometimes they are delivered non-naturally like we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and proceed according to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then accordingly you should care for those like we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does that which facilitates ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is gentle according to all figure, as it is prepared from the beginning leading to health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted fetuses.
Some women are formed in the womb to have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten children, and you should verify that a woman aborts nine times and another has all ten, which is caused by the measurement of the wise sages.
And all this is necessary in the science of the midwife, for it is a great deal that appears like this to her, and therefore pause should be made at this point with what is necessary.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not born outside, and you are forced to use an operation on her, then accordingly it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has a healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents by which on her there is feared loss.
Then accordingly it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back on a bed or pillow, and her head be inclined downward and her arms elevated.
And the minister should hold that one by two parts or tie her in a bed for so that the body of hers does not extend too far during the extraction of the fetus.
And accordingly you should moisten the mouth of her womb with olive oil and mummy of alta and fenugreek and seed of lily.
And accordingly the midwife should take her hand with those oils and mummy, and accordingly insert her hand with ease into the womb, and accordingly search for the location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
And when you have found the convenient location: then accordingly you should consider if the fetus is prepared to come out on its head, and accordingly place your fingers in the hollow of the skull, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of the skull, or in the places proper for the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
But if the delivery is over the feet of hers, then accordingly in the pelvis or in the middle of the ribs.
And accordingly you should hold the fingers with your right hand, and pause the curvature of hers in that location which is between the said fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with ease and place the fingers in one of those locations which we have said, until you reach the cause of birth.
And accordingly you should pause and remain in the position of hers another finger, or the third if it is necessary, in order that there may be a gentle attraction, and not an extension according to her natural straightness only.
And it is good for all parts, in order that the delivery of hers may be facilitated as if it were done by hand.
And it is good in her that which is between them, so that the extension may be softened; and if some part of hers is retained, then accordingly the midwife should apply some of her said fingers with oil and insert those expertly and turn around with what is retained.
Therefore if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then accordingly the fingers should be permitted to enter that location which is higher up; and make it so until all the fetus is brought forth.
But if the hand is stuck in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that one by the constriction of hers, then accordingly it is necessary that cloth be wrapped around that one; and accordingly extract that one until all is brought forth, and insert it either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And so it is necessary to do the same in the other hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is constriction during the delivery, or if there is water adjusted in the head of hers, then accordingly it is necessary to insert between the said spiny spatula and make an incision on the head and extract the water, or what discloses that one with a tool which is called "alundat", whose form will come with the forms of other instruments in the capital chapter which is apropos to this.
And similarly do the same if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and accordingly it is necessary to incise that one with an allegator, or take that one with an alundat as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and is constricted at the furcula, then accordingly it should be incised in order that the humidity which is in the feet may be poured out.
But if it is not complicated nor obedient to delivery, then accordingly you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what will be possible for you.
And if the afterbirth is apostematic or is in water retention, then accordingly it is necessary that you perforate that one until the humidity which is in hers flows out.
But if the fetus is on her feet, then accordingly the attraction of hers is light and the direction to her mouth is light.
But if it is constricted by the belly and feet, then accordingly it is necessary that you extract that one with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and that you incise the belly and feet until the water which is in those flows out.
But if the other members are stuck and return to the head, then accordingly insert your left hand; but if the mouth of hers is swollen, then accordingly insert your hand into the prepuce of her, and search for that one's head, and attract it with those fingers until it enters into the mouth of hers, and accordingly insert one or two fingers and draw hers towards those.
And if the mouth of hers is constricted by apostematic swelling which occurs in her, then accordingly it is not necessary to trouble about that; but before administering effusion of humid and greasy causes. And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on her ribcage, then accordingly it should be, if possible, sewn; and administered water as we have said in the live fetus.
And if this is not possible, then accordingly it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
And accordingly one should not leave any cause behind the second finger.
And when you have completed all your operation, then accordingly administer the water as we have said for curing of apostematic swellings which occur in her.
And if there occurs a flow of blood, then accordingly send it down in stiptic waters and administer the other cure.
And you have already seen a woman whose womb was dead, and accordingly on that same spot another pregnancy was undertaken, and accordingly the fetus is another. It happened to her that after a long time an apostema occurred in her umbilicus; and it swelled up into a boil, and began to burst forth.
And you were called to her cure, and treated her for a long time, and the wound did not consolidate.
Then you applied some causes of strong attraction to her, and extracted one bone from her, and accordingly passed some days, and extracted another bone; and you were too amazed, since in the womb there was no bone.
And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore you covered the wound, and extracted many bones from her, the woman existing in her own millenary dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, and corrected herself with a small piece of flesh.
And you did not hesitate to say that it was strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to what the physician has with his hand for curing.
Of the forms of instruments which are necessary for extracting the fetus.
The shape of the vice in which the mother is opened.
This is the shape of a strengthener in which the free ends are joined together by two vice-like contraptions at both extremities of two feet. And however this vice should be more subtle than the strictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
And the diameter of each stick is two fingers and a little more, and the margin of each is one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle location of two sticks are two adjustments of those sticks which are already fixed, the length of which is half a palm and a little more, and the diameter of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they can be opened with those when you turn the two prescribed vice-like contraptions.
Another similar form, more subtle and lighter:
It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of forceps. However, at the end of it there are two additional pieces like those, and the length of those additional pieces is one palm, and the diameter of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then accordingly you should cause the woman to lean back on her bed, with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. And accordingly place your hand with the instrument as you would with forceps, in equal measure according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother, until she does what you want.
The form of vice which the ancients called:
Form of impeller, with which the fetus is impelled.
Form of Amisidate, with which the great head is contained.
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the end, just like times, and some times are made long just like forceps according to this form, just like times, with teeth just like the teeth of a saw blade into which it is inserted and contained. Form of Amisidate little:
Form of finger having a spine:
Form of finger having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off.
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that and prepared by the artisans, as much as it is lighter for their operation and more numerous are the people for their quantity.
And you must not omit to prepare those instruments, whatever they may be, because the necessity of them is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the second finger.
When the second finger is retained, you must command the child to retain its right hand, and accordingly make her sneeze with conditions, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of hers and on her nostrils, and if by so it has emerged outside, it is good.
And if not, then accordingly take a ball and pierce a hole in the cover, pause in that herb and fill the mouth of the mother with it, just like with celandine and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic senna and cassia lignea and safflower. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the ball, and pause it on the fire.
And accordingly place a cane from flax in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes out into the concavity of the mother.
And accordingly make her sneeze just as we have said, and the second finger will be expelled with speed.
But if this cure does not work and the second finger remains, then accordingly command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of altarion, and accordingly insert that into the conic cavity and search for the second finger, and when you have found it, then take it and stretch it little by little. But if it is annexed to the womb of the mother, then accordingly insert your hand according to what we have recounted, and when you have found the second finger, extract it little by little according to the rule, so that the mother does not suffer from excessive attraction. And accordingly it should be facilitated on both right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, as we have already recounted the cure with sneezing and medication from the ball with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then accordingly take heed that you do not force it upon her in iteration of abstraction, but rather it should be brought to the mouth of the mother and placed at the cleft of the woman, and accordingly make it crusty with egg white and tetra-pharmacum; for that will cause it to rot away after a few days and be dissolved.
But when it rots away, it rises to the head, and to the stomach, and leads the patient astray; and accordingly it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences are administered accordingly.
But some of the Ancients have already experimented with sub-fumigation of Nazitort and dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and the second finger:
It should be made of beryl or horn.
And it should be paused with the subtle extremity in the cavity and the broad extremity above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be paused on the arms of the fire.
And hold that in until the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another one.
Of the cure for the unbroken navel of the child.
Many children are born with navels that are not perforated, those which have already become subtle and opaque. Then accordingly instruct the midwife to pierce that navel with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
And accordingly pause on that navel, pouring in wine and oil; and accordingly cure it with egg white until it is clean.
But if you fear that it may become opaque, then accordingly pause a tube in the navel for several days, and stop when the child wants to pass stool.
And if the navel becomes opaque due to consolidation of wound or aposteme; then accordingly it should be incised, and accordingly cured with the water which we have said for the cure and the lead.
Of the cure for fistulas that remain behind.
The fistulas that remain in the departure, which are lower than the navel and thicker, those which remain near the anus outside or in the space of one side.
And it is a single fistula or multiple ones.
And when that nodule is ancient and flows with white watery fluid or subtle pus, and some times it has some of these fistulas penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through excretion and windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the method of excretion, and very little is expelled from those worms.
And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space, entering the bladder and the urethra; and some of those penetrating ones enter the junction of the cleft and the notch of the clitoris.
And the way to know if a penetrating fistula is not penetrating is that you insert your finger into the anus and gently probe with a subtle instrument of horn or iron in the fistula when there is no resistance.
But if there is resistance in that, then accordingly insert into it a subtle instrument of lead or horsehair until you feel the instrument or hair in your finger.
And if you don't feel it at all nor proceed from the tube any cause of emission or worm or windiness, just as we have said, then accordingly know that it is not penetrating, and accordingly give up the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra, then accordingly its significance is evident from the urine of that and prohibition of it to be so, in order that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the cleft or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then accordingly its sign is that the instrument will pass through here if there is no resistance in the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the departure; and that from there you will have pus always; and that it will not be cured by medicine, nor consolidated with egg white.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is labor and toil of skilled physicians on which we have fixed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, expectation of healing with iron is hoped for according to what we have recounted, and what has already been proved.
And so the patient lies between your two hands and raises their knees to theirs, the clefts being inclined towards the belly of the patient, and accordingly insert a lead or horn instrument into the fistula if there is resistance, until you know the place where the instrument can pass.
And if the patient feels pain around the navel, then accordingly you should insert your finger into the navel.
And if you feel the instrument already having passed through and beginning to penetrate, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then accordingly you know for certain that it is penetrating; and then do not labor on that, since there is no healing in that, just as we have said.
But however, some say that it can be cured in certain men.
And the medicine by which it is hoped for recovery in that is that you burn a subtle cauter, according to the size of the fistula, just as we have said before, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it spreads around the navel; and accordingly repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh-tubes are fixed, which resemble the feathers of an owl.
And accordingly cure that with calomel wraps wrapped in parchment, until all those adjusted flesh-tubes are cleansed; and accordingly cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good is; and otherwise, it will not be healed at any time by other treatment.
And if the instrument enters and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the anus, and between that and the instrument which is a velamen of flesh or ciphac, and sometimes the fistula opens in what appears to be the surface of the skin, then accordingly dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the instrument, and it will be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the instrument is, and through the instrument is liberated and cut.
And accordingly cleanse those flesh-tubes which are assembled like the feathers of an owl, and do not remain any cause.
But if a flux of blood comes out sometimes when you are cleaning those flesh-tubes, then accordingly take the milk that is and of the pus, it is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: first, adjustment of those adjusted flesh-tubes, and secondly, abscission of the blood from excessive humidity.
And accordingly cure that with calomel wraps wrapped in parchment or in threefold cloth until the wound gets better, and accordingly cure the wound with egg white, hard flesh generating and consolidating.
And thus medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when accordingly it is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the cavity of the anus and is prolonged from the surface of the body, then accordingly insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
And thus if you find the instrument and between you and it is a velamen of ciphac or flesh, and it is intended for penetration, then accordingly there will be no operation in that place, but only according to the way of faith and hope.
Which cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of it so that it becomes possible for you to insert the instruments and the cure intended; and not proceed with drying at all because you do not want to excise the liver containing the navel, and the patient's wish is to come true; and accordingly cure that with what we have said, since it will be healed very quickly; or to lengthen that velamen and clean up that pus that dries out that area into the proper anus, as we have said, either with a probe or another sharp instrument of sharp extremity, and accordingly cleanse those flesh-tubes which are in the section until you can see through it; and accordingly strive to make the restoration of all the wound with drying, and if the upper opening is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the departure of the anus, and becomes easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is ended according to this manner: when you insert the instrument into the fistula, and it is in the lateral part of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and on the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle prepared for sewing according to this form:
and insert it into that faithful wrap of five folds or around those, and accordingly insert the instrument with faith into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of it.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the anus, then accordingly you extract the thread from that tube and insert your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two ends together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when more the thread is inserted into the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh-tubes are extracted which are between the two ends of the thread and fall.
And accordingly cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then accordingly make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but not in the cavity, for it is not up to you to do that lest you excise the liver; and accordingly do that until it is healed.
The form of the spatula spine with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other part is non-sharp, so that you do not excise anything that is not necessary, just as sometimes.
Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners, for either they are between the anus resembling charcoal, or else those are like a bunch of raisins. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them constantly and is one, or many, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the measures of little moisture, from which citrine water or a small amount of blood with continuous flesh flows, and according to the color of the flesh.
And the cure for that which is outside the anus is to command the patient to settle down and to express themselves into the anus until it opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then you take hold of it and suspend with the hooks or whatever instruments you have at your disposal, and accordingly cut away those hemorrhoids along their roots.
But if the hooks are not taken in those because of their moisture and softening, then accordingly take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of cloth or with a woolen rag, and extract them with your fingers, and accordingly cut away those hemorrhoids and powder some powders over them around the incision, so that they become attached to those at the place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is precedented in the chapter on cauterizing. And accordingly cure those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then accordingly anoint the patient with anointing oil in which there is a small biting, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and make it obey evacuation slightly when the patient has evacuated.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then accordingly the cause of their being is easy, and it is that you take those with your finger or with hooks, and cut away those, and accordingly cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
And whoever will make incision, must administer suturing of them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert that into the needle and accordingly extract the hemorrhoids at the upper parts, and make it penetrate through the root of the other part, and envelop the two ends of the thread in the most distant part of the needle, and so laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and accordingly tie off the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cut it off, in order that the superfluity of blood may flow from that.
And accordingly place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the anus, and place that over it and command the patient to rest. And accordingly leave it until it is closed; and when it is closed, cure those with egg whites or another cure until it is healed.
And since they are so ancient and do not respond to that medicine, then accordingly you must cut away those parts with the point of a spatula or your finger until they become moist and the excess flesh above is absorbed by those, which prevents consolidation; and accordingly cure those until they are consolidated.
Then accordingly you must cut away those parts with a reason more violent than the first one, until they bleed and are excoriated; and accordingly cure those until they are healed.
Know that Almesamar is the key, and it is not so if not according to the color of the flesh like a cap of chivalry, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and those said above, and thus one must use force by means of those pains to drive away love.
And then it is necessary to incise that which is in the cavity of the key, and to keep it with forceps or hooks, and to eradicate its root; and accordingly cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
But truly, warts are small, hard, round nodules on the surface of the skin, and many times they appear on children's faces.
And the cure for it is to stretch and incise that, or to strengthen that with a thread or skin until it closes. And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But a mole is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the skin that becomes inflamed when it is attacked by the fire and appears to be mummified around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a needle of goose quill or of vulture's feather, and make it strong, and place that on the mole so that it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of the skin; and accordingly revolve your hand with the needle until you incise what is in the circuit of the mole, and place it in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the mole from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle or iron according to this form:
Be the upper part of the needle very thin, soft (it is not perforated), wrapped so that on the said surface it learns to be ablated and the revolution of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterizing in the book of medicine.
The form of the instruments that are administered to give anointing.
Sometimes it is made anointing of silver or lead or melted iron or hammered iron; and sometimes it is made with small instruments big or small according to those which are administered, for that which is administered to the little children is small; and of those whose bottoms are rough or wrinkled, the anointings of those are small.
The form of great and little anointing.
The head of the needle above, in which the pouch is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is attached, just as it is sometimes.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be soft (not open) like a lion's, going back to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and thicker by a little.
And the pouch in which medicines from the bladder of an animal or wool of a sheep are placed, and the root of it is one palm.
And it should be pierced by many small holes like it is turned around; and if the space which is between the holes is as thick as said.
And accordingly insert it into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads or surrounds them; and adjust the pouch to that, and when the pouch is placed in it, be tight at the head of the anointing between two distinct ones with strong constriction, and accordingly anoint each hole: But the quality of anointing with that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And accordingly, the patient should be placed on their back with their legs elevated and a cloth spread under them, and pause below it one cushion or a bolster; and accordingly anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or albumen of hen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and accordingly insert that into the anus with ease, and accordingly the attendant takes the pouch and evacuates that with two hands and samples with violence until everything in the anointing is evacuated into the bedpan; and accordingly extract the anointing and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to happen, keep it as long as possible; and if they sleep with that for all one night, it is more likely to be a remedy.
But if you anoint that in the diseases of flux of the stomach and the evacuation of it is obstructed, then accordingly you will iterate the cauterizer until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or apostemes in the anus, then accordingly use a cauterizer that is very subtle and lion-like, from those cauterizers with which children are anointed.
The treatment of wounds.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that which is fitting for a free person, and I say thus the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to their complement.
Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to this, inasmuch as they are made the wounds and according to the place on which they are placed.
And the causes by which many times wounds are made are as follows: like a blow of a hammer, or incision with a sword or dagger, or percussion with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many other causes.
But the wounds that are on the parts of the body are as follows: like a wound that is on the head, or neck, or arms, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some wounds by which one pauses that rationalization and rule over other wounds.
And I begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, for the recollection of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the fourth chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is caused by a blow of a hammer or something similar, and already the bone has been so broken that there is great swelling and you fear that an apostema may form, then you take hold of the patient's head and fleubotomize it as soon as possible, without delay; and extract from that wound as much blood as is necessary according to the quantity of the virtue of the medicine, unless there is some other cause prohibiting fleubotomy, especially if the blood that has issued from the wound is little.
And be the fleubotomy on the opposite side of the wounded part; and beware the patient of replenishment, and of wine and of heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then accordingly minimize the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And pause over the wound if an apostema has formed cautiously, and cut in with rosy oil or wine that is stipticated.
But if it is certain of an apostema cautiously, then accordingly pause over the wound, if it is recent and its air has not changed that powder which I recommend in small quantity.
And if the air has already changed that, then accordingly pause over another application until it is healed.
But if the wound is great or caused by incision with a sword and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pulps, then accordingly adjust those with suture according to what I recommend about the suture of wounds.
But if the wound is already discovered to be of bone and flesh, and there is no retention of it except a small suspensori, then accordingly incise that and accordingly cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to abstain from foods which are gross: heads and forms, similar to theirs, until it is composed.
And if you find in the bone putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then accordingly incise all that is rotten and take out what remains, and accordingly cure what remains.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flux can occur, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then accordingly inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, then accordingly incise it with a spatula or tie it off; and if necessary, provoke what we have said to not concur, then accordingly cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then accordingly the cause of them is light; in such a way that you powderize on those this powder, for it consolidates before the air changes those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of non-extinguished cause; all well mixed and crushed, and fill the wound with it, and construe it with good constriction until it adheres well to that, and coagulates with the blood.
And accordingly strengthen that above with poultices and compress it, and do not remove it until it is thus as if it were not apostemed, for the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do this alone, when you don't have in front of you olive oil and dragon's blood.
And already perform this same operation on great wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and be tight, and on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then accordingly do not think about the position of this powder, but instead cure those with what we have said, in such a way that you pause over them with certain ointments or with powders made from flour and water mixed with honey until they take on a purulent appearance; and accordingly cure those with another cure until they are healed.
But if there is a fracture in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then accordingly extract what remains with gentle gestures.
And I will say the cure for fractures of the head in this which is poisonous.
Of wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then accordingly there is no difference in medicine and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is injured, then accordingly if it is a nerve, do not intervene with surgery but rather avoid any cure that would cause violent stiptication, such as zinnier and zegi which is vinegar and similar to theirs, because they are injurious to nerves and contract them. And do not pause over the wound any cause of total numbness, for the substance of nerves is numb and their continuation is in the brain, which is the most noble part of all limbs.
And if you use what is cured with light medicines, such as it being washed with lukewarm water, some times injected into rose-colored or non-rose-colored oil, and then when it is washed with lukewarm water and the other parts are minored according to this manner, and ointments moistened.
But if the wound is great, then accordingly administer suture, or bind the lips of it, and accordingly cure that with poultices until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of purulent matter, then accordingly pierce that in the most depressed location.
But if in the wound an artery has been incised and a flux of blood has resulted, then accordingly separate or dry that, or tie off that, or cauterize that if necessary provokes at that.
But if the vertebrae of the spine or all have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then accordingly adjust the lips of the bone with suture over the canal of the spine and do not touch that; before equaling that and reducing it to its natural figure, and accordingly strengthen that with decent stricture, and leave it for a few days; and accordingly cure that with ointments in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound is in the bone and has made an impression, then accordingly puncture that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not clothed, leave that until the wound is purulent, and separate and be relieved from the excrescence.
And if the wound is recent, then accordingly powderize on it the powder which I have recommended to you. But if in the wound there is a fistula, then accordingly cure that with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
If it is a lance or dagger wound and the depth of the wound is considerable, then accordingly consider whether the patient has ventilation when they are lying down; accordingly know that the wound is mortal.
And if the wound is not deep and the wound is recent with its own blood, then accordingly pause in it on the first hour with powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and harms the patient; but rather pause in it with an attractive ointment, and remove it two times a day.
And if the ointment is not present, then accordingly pause in the orifice of the wound with a piece of cloth so that it sucks out what you have from the humors; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that the fluid that is there will be adjusted.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound and the patient does not experience spasms, tremors of the heart, nor constriction of the armpits, and has other good dispositions towards it, then accordingly know that the wound is healed; and then cure that with poultices and another cure until it is fully healed.
But if the healing of it is impeded and it has been open for a long time, then accordingly know that it has become a fistula; cure then that according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is caused by incision of a sword or dagger and is simple in the surface of the foot or head, then accordingly cure that with what precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
But if the wound has made an impression in the bone and there are pieces of bone that need to be extracted, then accordingly twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then accordingly leave them inside until the wound purifies, and the extraction of them is relieved.
And for the other wounds that occur in the other members, the treatment in healing is the same as what we have said.
Of Wounds of the Belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of theirs is more difficult if you do not take care to introduce their substance into its place at once, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making it difficult for the instrument to be used.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, for in that there is not difficulty in reducing the budel, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And know that suturing the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common which are necessary for suturing other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper to it communicate with the other wounds, but are more proper in the suturing of the belly.
And I recommend to you whatever exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the belly from it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then accordingly this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has come inflated due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, accordingly it is necessary that you scrape that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or that you gather in warm water, and cyperum, and spic, and then apply that to the belly until the inflation is resolved.
And sometimes it does this with vinegar in which there is a purging quality, and it is better than hot water alone for the resolution of the inflation.
And therefore when you see the inflation be resolved, accordingly you moisten the belly with water in which is cooked alum and meadow-sweet, because through this the instrument of it is facilitated with little cause.
But if the instrument of it is excused in this cure, then accordingly you cut the disruption a little with an instrument by which they are incised and mortified.
And the first cure is better when it is proper and not severe, and there is no occupation to cut too much, nor to occupy oneself in cutting unnecessarily.
Of the Instrument: see how its shape is like this:
The one end of it bent and acute, and the other end not acute, and the extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt by a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and yields forth from the belly, accordingly it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its own proper place, if possible above all, for that is better.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, accordingly it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his knees higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then accordingly you place the head and legs higher than the remaining parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then accordingly place your intention and consideration always so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary to administer this in great wounds and middling wounds.
And in small wounds, pause for that which is at your preparation, and accordingly make the minister be between your most skilled ones, who has the disruption entirely under his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and accordingly uncovers from this to that which sees some other cause for suturing.
And this is the common manner of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and accordingly leave it at the extremity of the disruption from the said ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or twice, that you do not put faith in both ends of the bone, with both ends of the ciphac that is left the bone of the parties inwardly, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two ends of the bone and two ends of the ciphac, and so there are four orders.
And accordingly strengthen it with a double thread in the circle of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and accordingly add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and accordingly leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and accordingly tie that with a thread like as it was tied to the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be middling between thickness and subtlety, for the thin needles barely cut into the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the bone, and therefore it is necessary that they be middling in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be placed in both ends of the bone proper to one, lest the flesh be barely cut and the wound be inflamed before its consolidation.
And there should not be prolonged suturing so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
And accordingly insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during his sleep; and place poultices spread out on all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these species of suturing with needles in this manner are more convenient for small wounds, for they suffice in the suture of them with one needle or two or around those.
But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing all four ends, of the bone and two ends of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which thread is wrapped evenly in subtlety and thickness.
And accordingly when you have the needle penetrated these four ends, withdraw the needle from that middle part of which it began, so that the thread retrays its place from the most superior part to the wound, so that the suturing be according to the suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the finger smaller.
And this suturing is known to men.
And with such suturing I cured the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been wounded by a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the middle of the belly, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the belly had been open for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he was healed; and accordingly he lived for many years, and is converted to his former dispositions.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was so, for you did not treat him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound cutting twice a day and ablution with water of honey until he was healed.
But you said two species of proper suture according to the narrative of Paraula.
And it's that you began with the bone suture, and inserted the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And therefore when the needle penetrates into the bone and meets the lacertus according to rightness and in length throughout the whole body, and leaves the end of the ciphac where you inserted the needle; and makes it penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the thigh.
And then when you have made it penetrate once, accordingly make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the thigh from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the ciphac that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity of the inside part to the outside part.
And make it penetrate with that penetration of yours, by which you cause it to penetrate into the ciphac in the extremity of the mirror, which is on the part of it, until all that penetrates.
And accordingly begin from this side, and cut that with the end of the ciphac on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the bone which penetrated, and accordingly reduce it into that bone and close the end of the ciphac which is on the other side with this end of the mirror; and withdraw that one from the bone which is of part of it.
And make this once and another, and make this once again accordingly with the other once until you have closed all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you close with suture of pellicies in which you close the skin, so that you close the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the bone, and then leave it once until you have completed all.
But the second species of proper suture which you said Gualia, and this is according to the word of him and by him recounted, is that you close it according to semilitut in which certain medicines are closed, so that they add all part to its corresponding part to what is convenient for nature; and apply the end of one side of it and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to how I have recommended.
And it is necessary that you put the needle into the end of the mirror at your own discretion from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside part in that same spot, and leave two ends of the ciphac; and accordingly revolve the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the ciphac.
And accordingly revolve those threads, and make them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part in two ends of the mirror on the other side that is opposite.
And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture of which I spoke earlier.
This is the word of Gualia
And others say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the introduction of needle from this side which belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who close the skins together.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle part of the belly, accordingly the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
But the judgment of medicine for wound is judgment of other wounds.
The cause is that when you succeed in curing a recent wound at the same time as its own blood before it has altered that, and reduces the swelling and closes it and adjusts it decently, accordingly pause over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, accordingly pause over those ointments which are at your presence until they make firm pressure and let go the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and accordingly cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, accordingly pause over that for a while, since it begins to putrefy, cut and change it twice a day, just as I taught you, until it is healed, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate to damage the principal members, accordingly it is necessary that you submerge linen cloth in quality tallow oil or in rose oil, and pause that in the circle of places which are between the angles and leave those as they are.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own belly, since many times this is necessary, accordingly anoint that with black bean juice, and especially if the inflammation has been produced in the belly and is made an exit through the convolutions of it.
And you know that what is from the thick belly is easier to heal than what is in the thin bellies.
And it is difficult to heal because the belly which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that is made in it entirely; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of the body of that part, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is a thread, and you succeed in getting it recent, reduce it according to your rightness with which you reduce bellies together.
But if it has passed to the space and is already become green or black, accordingly you strengthen that with thread over the place which is degraded from it, in order that the fluxes of blood may return, because in the thread are veins and arteries.
And accordingly insert into this that is another bond, and pause the two ends of the thread pending from the left part of the wound, in order that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the compression of the thread and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the belly.
When a disruption occurs in the belly and it is small, accordingly it is possible that it can be restored in certain men, because of this reason you saw him who was wounded in his own belly with the blow of a lance and had an old wound made fistula, and it was swollen and distended.
And then I began to heal him already as he was not convinced in the healing of it, but rather I continued to subtlety that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I then saw the place already consolidated, and I recommended to the patient who had developed an illness as a result of the accident in his own belly; and he did not develop any further after this bad accident and remained in his usual good habits eating and drinking, and accordingly entered into bathing and is exercised in his daily activities.
And already others have said that when an illness occurs in the belly and it is small, accordingly it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: and it is that you take threads of great caps; and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound and pause a thread from those which has the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; therefore when you take on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And accordingly pause another thread near the first one, and do not cease to make threads one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
And accordingly reduce that and close the wound; and the attached capsules remain in the belly until the belly is healed; and no harm occurs to anyone's illness.
And it is possible that the belly be tied with a fine thread made from the belly of an animal attached to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of these threads from the belly, and it is very thin, and accordingly tie the end of it to the thread, wrapped, and accordingly insert that thread into needles and close with that thread on the belly, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this manner of suture with threads is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin bellies, because accordingly it is not a simple matter but subtlety, and it is not healing of it entirely.
Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every wound and apostema when it becomes ulcerous and old, and is made an ulcer, and does not consolidate and always gets putrid, accordingly, in whatever member it may be, universally is called fistula and we call it that azuchem.
And fistula according to truth is a nodous formation, hard, white and painless, with which there is a convulsion similar to the pain of an owl; and for this reason we call that certain rizzats, i.e. pain.
And it is in some men humid, which gets putrid; and the humidity is very quickly absorbed in a few hours. And sometimes this humidity is great, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
Already I have shown all those causes and their signs, as well as the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that you know how to make the cure of fistula, which is made by way of operation with my hands.
And know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because some are fistulas that penetrate to great veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to ciphac, or to belly, or to bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed in such a way as from hand and foot; and those which are near to the proximity of the main member and similar.
And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-heal illnesses, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if some of the fistulas are of such depth that they do not penetrate to those places which I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in the cure of it, and wish to reach understanding of it, accordingly take a tenta of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows rightness, and you probe it with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, accordingly investigate it with a thin leaden tenta, because lead with the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved by the twisting.
And if the fistula has many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify on it with a tenta.
And accordingly close the opening through its openings, because the moisture which you use to cleanse it will flow into the other openings and run off from them.
And accordingly inquire exhaustively, according to which manner it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and if the fistula is long or short, or if it is a fistula with many openings and located above all on the sum of your strength, in your investigation, in which you investigate the patient, and the invention of pain due to your compression with your hand on the location, and similar signs and causes that occur at the apostema.
And when you have stood on all those causes with a steady gaze, accordingly go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salient location, distant from the joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I tell you and say.
And accordingly you seal the fistula according to what is said before in the narration of it, and stop this that is in that filtration and corrupt flesh, and this that has been born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the tail and similar things, and cure this until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of long and deep depth, and it follows rightness, accordingly you must insert that into the preon as far as possible for you to signify; and accordingly clarify this from all its corrupt flesh; and accordingly administer certain wrapped medications, and introduce those into the convulsion of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this with that for several times until the acute medicine has consumed all that remains in the convulsion of the fistula from corruption.
And accordingly restore that with those which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, accordingly you must cauterize that according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify this, accordingly you must inquire into that and seal that according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit some cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered by you and there is some corruption and blackness in it, accordingly you must scrape out that entire corruption; and accordingly cure that with what encloses it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and gets putrid as before, accordingly know that you have not succeeded in the complete eradication of corruption; and then you must uncover it again and make the reason of it and clarify it with the last remaining force of yours, and accordingly restore that.
And thus if it is healed, good it is; and otherwise, accordingly know that that corruption is in the deep, distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and then you must leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to draw that in, accordingly you must draw it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, accordingly make the extraction of all those in an exquisite manner, and leave not a single cause behind with your strength.
But if any cause of the humors makes you contrary, and in their insertion there is no fear nor error, accordingly insert those ligaments or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
But if your preparation is not ready to extract the bones of your time, accordingly pause over the wound that perturbs the wound itself, and leave it until such time as this wound is in the environs of those bones, flesh, and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inserted into your operation be constricted.
They had, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in a mixture of oil and wine, or a wound submerged in Egyptian balm, or in some of the green ointments, for when those ligaments rot, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and the attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, accordingly scrape out that with a rasp only on the back side until that blackness and corruption is removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, accordingly it is necessary to close that and insert it entirely into the place where the corruption has spread, and accordingly cure that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you this, that you persuade a man in his own way for you to pause and consider carefully about your operation.
There is a young man of about thirty years old, who suffers from pain in his hip, and the parts that are damaged on the outside are over the matter on the outside of the body until the matter has spread to the hip, and it is a material of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
And then the time was extended with that patient due to the error of the doctors until the apostema was hubert, and there was a great accumulation of matter, and his cure was accordingly paused until the hip was fistulated, and there were many openings in it which all drained pus and the humors of the body.
And then a multitude of doctors was applied to him for about two years, and there was no knowledge in them except in the art, until you were called.
And I saw the hip of that man and the matters flowing from it through many openings in his great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabled and the color of him was citrine.
And then I introduced a probe into one of those openings and brought it to the bone.
And accordingly I explored all the openings and found those that reached their entirety on all parts of the hip.
And then I cut and scraped over one of those openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found that it was corrupted, and already it was rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the hip was corrupted to such an extent that it had penetrated into the joint.
And then I covered with a layer of bone what was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And I found that it was not in the bone itself but rather that corruption which had abscessed and covered, and I had already drained it.
And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And accordingly, I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily upon the initial discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
And accordingly, I covered with a layer what appeared to me as that corruption, and accordingly, I was forced to perforate in order to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And accordingly, I discovered again on the other side and did not cease to scrape out the small bone little by little, particularly and carefully perforated the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I scraped around one palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly restored it with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of the flesh of it and the scarcity of the tolerance of it and fear of death, because at that time it was happening in all hours due to excessive evacuation and bad syncope.
And therefore, it is healed through entire healing, and nothing is left in place of hard bone; and it was done well the disposition of it in its own body, and restored to its virtue; and it has been converted into its own dispositions and does not cause contrariety in ambulation or harm in any cause.
But if it is bone that protrudes in place of the body already torn, accordingly you must cut it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it; and pause that ligament until it becomes thicker than the first one; and accordingly tie that over the flesh that remains on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can attract the flesh to the parts left behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to suture so that the suture does not harm the flesh.
And pause with a file or table left behind the bone decently, because when you do this it is not forbidden to cut that which does not corrupt the flesh.
And it is necessary that the suturing be done over the corrupted area little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, then one must resort to another suture.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is better to uncover the entire surface of the flesh from all parts; and accordingly pause with a file left behind, and accordingly cut that from the first part where there is corruption until the suturing of the other part is continued.
And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, scrape out that corrupted joint and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, accordingly it is not rational but rather a mistake.
And if the corruption is in the breast of the arm or leg, it is quite difficult; however, you must inquire into the corruption in what way it appears to you, and then open up that area, and clarify it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with every mistake be rectified by you, when it does not cause contrariety with veins or nerves.
And know that what instruments and cuts are needed to cut into those bones are many according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, size, subtlety, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary for you to prepare all sorts of instruments suitable for each operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you about the type of instrument which you need; when with you is great study and long experience in the ways of this art, and witness to the manners of diseases, for accordingly you had already learned through your own observation what is suitable for each disease.
And accordingly, you have formed in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which I will pause with as simple ones, and with which I will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. **Forma de serra:**
**Forma de autra serra:**
**Forma de autra serra gran:**
**Forma de Ray:** **Sia le cap de aquest Ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les punts de lu sian segon la forma dels punts alstefegi.**
**E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.**
**Forma de razori menor:**
**Forma de razori lat:**
**Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descendant fayt.** **Forma de lu:**
**Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:**
**Forma de razori autra subtil:**
**Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:**
**Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:**
**Forma de inscisori autra minor:**
**Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a Ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:**
**Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:**
**E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat:**
**E es fayt de ferr de India, e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.**
**De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.**
**Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.**
**E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es quel membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquella ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.**
**E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunes causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.**
**E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcion per que ane entro a la ma.**
**E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcion entro que prengua en le focil del bras.**
**E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.**
**E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.**
**E semblantment fay del pe quando corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.**
**E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.** **Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.**
**E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.**
**E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.**
**E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toche le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.**
**Mays si accideys flux de sanc quando obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.**
**E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.**
**E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio that era asemblada a combustio de foc.**
**E aquela corrupcio accidic primiermente en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.**
**E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu that atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.**
**Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteys
**E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo that pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.**
**E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.**
**E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.**
**E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia ajutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.**
**De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.**
**Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes el spazi de lapostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.**
**Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.**
**E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.**
**Mays si tu speras that la codena adheresca e that aquela corrupcio no aya conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.**
**E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, el brac that yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que'l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.**
**E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.**
**E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguada la pudor.**
**E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes quel sinu lahoras es ostat.**
**E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni laygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.**
**E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes quel sinu ja es remaugut, laoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.**
**E es that prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz others that hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.**
**E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.**
**E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, laoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.**
**E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quand le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.**
**E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, laoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.**
**Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.** **E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot or pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.**
**E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o non, e si es en lu apostema.**
**E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.**
**Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.**
**E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias quel sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.**
**E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de quello.**
**E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quando
**E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.**
**E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.**
**De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.**
**Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.**
**E donc quand tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.**
**Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addiciones de la ugla vuoydas ja compren las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ugla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquella carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.**
**Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanitation que sia en lu le os corrumput.**
**E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sant.**
**Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ugla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ugla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.**
**Mays dit ajustat, le quali es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ugla.**
**E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.** **Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.**
**E de aqueles que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.**
**Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es difficile; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.**
**Mays en aquel que es nat en dit, deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelles serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.**
**Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquella consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.**
**E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatez leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.**
**E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.**
**De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.**
**Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.**
**Adonc cove que tu administres purgaio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.**
**Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l'autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.**
**La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que veces habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.**
**E aprop lia aquella, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.**
**E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.**
**Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que senrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro quel membre sia scalfat.**
**E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.**
**E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquella roga declinant a negror.**
**E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.**
**E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.**
**E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.**
**E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.**
**E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.**
**E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro quen sia getada.** **E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquella nouncement.**
**E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sant.**
**E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquella tota.**
**E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquella, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquella.**
**Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:**
**No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.**
**De extraccio venae cruris.**
**Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.**
**E fort leu es engendrada en altri locs del cors otra les cambas.**
**E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.**
**E senhal de la suscepcio de ladveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.**
And then when the extremity appears, you should wrap around it a lead weight of one drachma and two drachmas, and wet it and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
**E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.** **E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquella es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.**
**Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.**
**E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.**
**E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo that is in the materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquella per la curacio de apostemas.**
**E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.**
**E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.**
**De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.**
**Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.**
**E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.**
**E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar cuando el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruyeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.**
**E donc quandu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.**
**E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.**
**May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove quel malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.**
**De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.**
**Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.**
**E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.** **Yeu fu apelat a uma femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.**
**E adonc anet sen la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqu stec per una hora.**
**E aprop correc en lautre cors entro que pervenc al altre bra.**
**E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.** **E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquella manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.** **Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.**
**E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.**
**E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.**
**E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre
**Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquellas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.**
**De extraccio de sagetas.**
**Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.**
**E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.**
**E donc si apareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.**
**Mays les senhals de la sageta quando catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.**
**E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels that so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.**
**E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.**
**E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.**
**E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es sperana en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.**
**E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.**
**Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, el golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicions quando la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.**
**E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.**
**La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l'aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.**
**E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.**
**E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.**
**E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .**
**E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquella; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicions, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.**
**E vi mays un home en le qual cazec uma sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.**
**E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicions en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunes de les suas operacions naturals.**
**E vi un altre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobat aqui mota dolor, e motzsemblantz ad aquestz.**
**E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas seu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.**
**E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.**
**E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquella; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquella punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.**
**E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi quel loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.**
**E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.**
**E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.**
**E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que aparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre months.**
**E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps decentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquellas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquella; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.**
**E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sant es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.**
**E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las definicions de aquela no so comprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas el libre.**
**E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo that es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.**
**E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.**
**E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.**
**E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l'atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.**
**E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.**
**E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que'l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.**
**Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.**
**E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.**
**E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen that poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.**
**E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.**
**E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan les partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquella quar lahoras es alleujada.** **Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.**
**E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.**
**E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so quel malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.** **Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per les figures.**
**Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partiade les partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partiade pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.**
**Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.**
**E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro quen yesca.**
**E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.**
**Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.**
**Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impulleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquella, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquella.**
**E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves touta la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.**
**E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquella e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.**
**Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:**
**Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quando prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.**
**E de aquellas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.**
**Ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.**
**De fleubotomia de las venas.**
**Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx.,** **De las quals so en le cap .xvi.,** **So es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas that so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas that so en doas lacrimals de doas huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas that so en la labia desus; e doas venas that so en la labia dejos; e  aquestas so las venas that so appeladas algelic ; e so doas venas that so dejos la lengua.** **Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.;** **Quar de aquellas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela la vena del cap, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquella le poble vena de tot le cors, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada citillar, e nompnan aquella les vulguars vena del ventre; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular el pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.**
**E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquellas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, el loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, el loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.**
**Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.**
**E la qualitat de sagnar aquellas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelles en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquellas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.**
**Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro quel fleubotomi vengua al os.** **E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.** **E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de doi ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.**
**E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.**
**E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquellas e de lor la cauterizacio.**
**Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.**
**E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquellas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.**
**E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitant.**
**E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquella coto e pulvils e strenh aquella desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.**
**E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquellas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.**
**E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.**
**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es quel malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:**
**Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquella vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.**
**E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove quel fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.**
**Mays le juvament de las dues venas que so als lacrimals de doi huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.**
**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es quel malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquellas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.**
**E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.**
**E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquellas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquellas.**
**Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.**
**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es quel malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.**
**Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquella es restaurada leugierment.**
**Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.**
**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquellas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.**
**E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.**
**E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so quel malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quand la plagua es sanada.**
**E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.**
**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquellas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquellas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.**
**Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquellas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquellas, e de la pus manifesta de aquellas.**
**E fay le semblant de las doas venas that so en las labias desus.**
**Mays de doas venas that so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios that so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.**
**E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquellas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.**
**E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e
**E las tuas venas that so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:**
**Sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquellas que conteno sanc gros torbat.**
**E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils that conteno sanc subtil citri.**
**Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias that so dejos le guolayro el col, e de aquo que siec le pietz el ventre.**
**E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, that guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove that no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.**
**E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove that tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.**
**Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras that toches le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bra
**E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.**
**E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, el sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.**
**E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.**
**Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes that thou art not present medicine ad hoc, lahoras tu inscideys the arteria, si appar to thee; quar the extremity of it is contracted, and is abscinded the blood; or that thou takest a handful of fistic, and feneth it, and taketh one third part thereof, and strenhest it upon the place of the vein with strictura descending am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.**
**E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.**
**E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicions per le loc petit de la plaga e la possibilitat del liament del brao.**
**Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.**
**E cove al fleubotomant aquella que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.**
**E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.**
**Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.**
**E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.**
**Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.**
**Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per sperana de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primavera, sobre dejun en primavera e autunnne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de repleci.**
**E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres hours.**
**Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenienza e necesitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.**
**E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.**
**E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove that mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.**
**E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naua sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.**
**E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.**
**E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibit, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so quel sanc sia subtiliat.**
**E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.**
**E perforsa te quel pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.**
**E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.**
**E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut quel coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.**
**E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aque
**E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.**
**E aprop la strictura, cove that aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps between lor entro that las venas sian infladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.**
**E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquella es streyta.**
**E donc, per aquo cove quel fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.**
**E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.**
**Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.**
**E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.**
**E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant quel loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.**
**Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna cause; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna parti **E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les altre olis.**
**E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquellas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.**
**E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquella veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquella per una hora, quar es dissolvut.**
**E cove that fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.**
**E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna cause de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.**
**E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas eeminences deves fleubotomia de la basilica.**
**E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.**
**E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l'autra curacio entro que sia sanit.**
**E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.**
**Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.**
**E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha ncessitade extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.**
**E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.**
**E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, non punctura.**
**E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.**
**E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.**
**E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.**
**E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.**
**E usa de las autras causas that havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.**
**E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.**
**Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii hours or nine of the first flebotomie.**
**Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove that sia eventat in the second day or third.**
**Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove that sia gitat de lu sanc in one occasion and a great quantity be shed and the warning be amplified until syncope occurs, more than you have preserved all the conditions of flebotomia; and that you pause your hand over the pulse of the blood to prevent death instead of syncope, for many occasions end badly when the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglectful.**
**E no cove when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood second time, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is difficult to issue the blood, that you press upon it with vehemence and bend it slightly, for this is too bad.**
**Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi that es coagulat del sanc in the orrifici of the vein; or pause sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress it with compression light entro que el sanc sia fora yssit.**
**E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques until the apostema is sedat.**
**E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna quello sobre aquel loc or in autre bras in autre vena.**
**E la vena apelada funis del bras is phlebotomed in loc of the fusca or of the basilica, when not obstructed or hidden, for it is composed of those.**
**E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es that the patient introduces his hand into cold water until the pulse becomes more visible and the vein appears manifestly.**
**E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liement am strictura magnifico; e aprop fleubotoma segond le transvers petit, non latitudinally nor according to the longitude.**
**E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia with the which thou fleubotomas that one on the junction of the arm and small.**
**E si es prohibido el flux de sangre, lahoras tu itera la mano en agua fra y deja que la sangre corre en el agua hasta que consigues lo que necesitas.**
**Mays if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the month is paused the flow of blood in cold water in winter.**
**And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than all other veins, because it leaves you with no pulsating vein or nerve.**
**And the phlebotomy of the vein of the right arm is corresponding to the diseases of the liver.**
**And the quality of the phlebotomy at that time is that you strengthen your hand with intent or with your own hand, more than you have put it in cold water, until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; and then you will cut across, and if you do not see anything there, you will not be satisfied with this.**
**And be careful not to finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because you leave it so that the nerves of the fingers are exposed and bare.**
**And then move your hand into cold water and let the blood flow freely in it, for if you do not move your hand into cold water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein and be prohibited from flowing.**
**And since the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated abruptly; and similarly, you should do the same for all other veins.**
**But the judgment of the phlebotomy of that on the left arm is that it corresponds to the diseases of the gallbladder.**
**And do the same in the phlebotomy of this one, just as you have done in the other.**
**And the judgment of the phlebotomy is related to diseases that are located in the lower part of the body, just like those of the kidneys, and also to retention of menstruation, and to diseases of the throat, and ulcers of old sores and joints, and their similar maladies.**
**And the quality of the phlebotomy at that time is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and presses on it until the veins appear; then he places himself on the joint of the foot with a cord, and the location of the vein is marked by a dot on the said foot, and from there it branches out in the face of the foot like a bunch of ramps.**
**And therefore phlebotomize the most ample vein below the knee, at the spot where the aggregation of blood is greatest, for it is better and more suitable.**
**And if you phlebotomize that on the face of the foot, then you should beware of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy as if you were to incise it.**
**And be the phlebotomy vain.**
**But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you should put the foot of that one in cold water and let the blood flow freely into it until it is evacuated.**
**And if the phlebotomist erred in the first attempt, then you should go back to the phlebotomy and do it a little more, for the spot is sore; and don't worry about the malady, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.**
**And similarly do the same for the saphenous vein of the other foot as well.**
**And for the sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is below the tail of the partition of the wild forest.**
**And the judgment of the phlebotomy at that time is to be careful not to let blood flow when it is cautious.**
**And the quality of the phlebotomy at that time is that the patient should enter a bath, and hasten and strengthen the vein of that one from the lat to the width of the ankle up to the four fingers in a subtle band, so that it appears only through that.**
**And therefore, when it appears, then you should phlebotomize that one according to each individual's nature that is possible for you and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise that one by incision or secede that one by section, because the spot of that one is sore.**
**And it is in the midst of men like a woman; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to your sense, then you should phlebotomize some branch of that one, and it is that which appears on the two sides of the foot below the said auricular and anular.**
**And beware of the nerves, and let blood flow in the quantity that you desire.**
**And approach the structure and pause over the spot of the phlebotomy cut and strengthen the spot, so that slightly it is healed.**
**Of the advantages and qualities of using those things.**
**Ventozations are of combs, or of horns, or of veerings.**
**And ventozation is done in two ways: one of them is by scarification and blood extraction, and the other is by ventozation without scarification.**
**And this ventozation that is without scarification is done in two ways, because one is with fire and the other is without fire.**
**And the 14 locations of the body where bloodletting with scarification and blood extraction is administered are: one in the area where pauses are made, which is the occipital bone at the back of the head; and the middle location between the two parts of the neck; and bloodletting below the mandible just below the mouth; and bloodletting on both sides of the mento; and bloodletting on the alohoster, which is located above the coccyx; and bloodletting at the end of the coccyx; and bloodletting at two points, each of which is located between two arm bones; and bloodletting on both sides of the pelvis; and bloodletting on both sides of the hipbones.**
**And bloodletting does not extract blood from the large veins, but rather from the small, scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore it is not a method for purging the body through those means, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary to perform bloodletting with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion, until the entire body is evacuated.**
**However, if necessity arises due to illness or continuity, we shall administer the bloodletting at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at some other time.**
**And therefore when the moon is in its third or middle phase, we order bloodletting to be done more than two or three hours after sunrise.**
**And the judgment of bloodletting from the neck is that when it causes gravity in the head and down to the eyes; however, it is necessary that this be done after a thorough evacuation of the entire body.**
**And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.**
**And it is not permitted to use it on one who has a complete blockage or in whom there is catarrh, because it would give rise to great harm.**
**And therefore it is not necessary to use that on the elderly, and in those whose heads are afflicted with serious diseases.**
**But if one is continuing on that and it is done over there, forgetfulness ensues; and therefore you must command the bloodletting attendant to pause for a moment before opening the next vein, lest forgetfulness occur.**
**But bloodletting from the alkehel is in the location of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and basilica: and therefore it gives rise to asthma, constriction of the lung, scissura of the larynx, cough, and repletion.**
**And it is necessary that the bloodletting from the alkehel be done in a small amount, for if it is paused afterwards, it will engender weakness in the chest and stomach.**
**And the bloodletting from alhagdahan gives rise to accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, emigration, precocity, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilica.**
**And it is necessary that you command the bloodletting attendant to not press his hand with scarification, so that he does not cut into the artery and cause a flow of blood.**
**And bloodletting after the tongue gives rise to ulcers in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and similar afflictions as those that are in the mouth; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the aliheric vein which is in the two lips.**
**But the bloodletting that is done on both spatulas gives rise to caphatan, which is caused by an excess of warmth.**
**And the bloodletting from both parts of the dentals gives rise to a judgment about the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because that attracts the blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until it reaches an attraction to the three veins.**
**And command the bloodletting attendant not to proceed too quickly with scarification, for the location is stripped of flesh and leaves only nerves and arteries.**
**And it is a bloodletting in which one is bled over the ashoses and gives rise to hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.**
**And it is necessary that you command the bloodletting attendant to be a great bloodletting, and of eram, because the location demands strong section; and strong, subtle bloodlettings are torn, and be scarified with scarification.**
**But small bloodlettings from the knees, manifestly so, because they attract the blood of all the body, and give rise to old pains in the lungs and the belly, and the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and give rise to bothor and demil; and are located in the location of phlebotomy of two saphenas, and alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.**
**However, they can damage the entire body and cause syncopal episodes in many men.**
**And the judgment of the alahorcoben bloodletting is similar to the judgment on the bloodlettings of two knees.**
**And the quality of the position of the bloodlettings is that one pauses the bleeding at the beginning, and sucks it up slowly with a gentle suction, and does not prolong the position of the bloodlettings, but rather pauses them slightly, and holds them quietly, and allows the humors to come forth naturally.** **And do not cease iterating until you see the location already reddened and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.**
**And when you are ready, scarify and iterate the suction gradually, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.**
**Because that man who has tender skin and few pores, you must scarify him only once and not again, so that the location is not ulcerated.**
**And command the bloodletting attendant to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and then apply suction with ease.**
**And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first scarification, the way of subtlety to the blood and its satiation is opened.** **But in the second scarification, one must carefully scrutinize the extraction of the thick blood.**
**And if the blood is very foul, then it is necessary to make a third scarification in order to achieve the desired result.**
**And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small quantities, it is enough for us to make one scarification.**
**And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify slowly and carefully.**
**And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision as much only.**
**And if the incision is large, hard, and red, and its pores are very tight, it is necessary to lubricate the locations of the bloodletting with a gentle, open, and resolving oil; if it is in the summer, then use olive oil, or violet oil, or almond oil, or chamomile oil; and if it is in the winter, then use birch oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.**
**And if the superfluity is great, fresh, then the oil should be amaranth, or balm of Gilead, or olive oil, or aniseed oil, and to those similar.**
**But if the bloodletting attendant has large pores of tender skin, then it is necessary that he be prohibited from using oil, and it is necessary that he apply water or fresh water from a source such as saltwater, cow's milk, or borehole water to the locations of bloodletting, and similar waters to those.**
**And that person whose blood is very wet, washes his bloodletting tools with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar waters to those.**
**And that person whose superfluities are great, washes his bloodletting tools with old vinegar, or water of Sancho, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar waters to those.**
**And it is necessary to keep the bloodletting before dinner; having to be administered about one hour or two hours before dinner, and it is necessary that he sleeps near the bloodletting.**
**What is the need that one must regulate the bloodletting before bleeding?**
**And consider at the beginning: then if the bloodletting attendant or he who must bleed is choleric and prone to inflammation of the blood, then it is necessary that he takes cooling causes, such as mugwort, bitter orange peel, endive with vinegar, lettuce, and scallion, and similar remedies.**
**And pause from their foods, such as potage, and fowl flesh, and prepared dishes with spices, and similar remedies.**
**And that person whose complexion is fresh, should take in drinking essence of almond or essence of alkanet seeds, and sumac, and wine with a mild scent between Easter and Christmas; and it is recommended that he uses moderation in drinking and eating, and pause from foods like potage, cabbage, and small birds and pigeons.**
**And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and bleeding, drink should be greater than food.**
**And it is necessary that he be given to drink in some hours before certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicinal herbs of musc, so that the musketa is made, or alcelita before bloodletting or near it, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and it is not necessary for them to take those scalded.**
**But the bloodletting that is called scarification is bloodletting that is paused on the liver, and on the gallbladder and podagra, and on the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the plexus of the spine, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.**
**And it is not sought after by those who have blood flow disease of the nose, but rather atraction of blood from member, such as pausing bleeding on mammary gland in the illness of bloody flux of the nose; and we use that to dissolve fresh viscosity of member, such as pausing on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and cools it and relieves pain which is resolved by dissolving.**
**And it is paused over the tonsils when they are obstructed or swollen, because by virtue of strong attraction it opens up obstruction and eradicates swelling from its place.**
**And similarly, it does when paused over the liver and gallbladder to dissolve venosity in those who are enclosed.**
**And these bloodlettings are administered with suction only, and sometimes with heat.**
**And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in cases of gallbladder disease.**
**And this is why the bloodletting is filled and made greater, whether it is with cold water alone or water in which certain herbs are steeped to suitable proportions.**
**Form of bloodletting administered with heat: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the point should be half a palm; and it should be in the lat part of the instrument, in the place where it is in the circuit, one quarter of the instrument, the hole should be small according to the amount that an awl can enter into it.**
**It should be made of earthenware or citrine, with thick borders, lion, equal and third parts, in order that it may not disturb the member's position on it.**
**And it should be in the middle of a transverse beam made of earth or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.**
**And it is this bloodletting that is greater than the one we have recommended, and the small amount of blood that flows from it according to the diseases and state of the person who uses it.**
**And the bloodlettings of the elderly and exhausted are different from those of the young and robust.**
**And the quality of pausing this bloodletting with fire on the member is that it extends the ember with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and pauses it over the middle of the transverse beam in the middle location of the bloodletting, so that the fire be kindled around the part left over so that it may not burn the patient's body.**
**And it is placed over the member of the patient, and the said thing is on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have bloodletting and do not need to open the hole and let the vapor rise over that hole, then the bloodletting will be dissolved.**
**And blow gently with the ember according to its manner, and repeat that if you need it.**
**But in bloodletting that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, where there is no transverse beam or hole, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member only.**
**And this is the form of it: And as this bloodletting grows greater, so too does its quality, for it can receive a large quantity of water.**
**Chapter XCIX**
**Bloodlettings are not administered on fleshy members, but only on those where it is not possible to apply bloodletting cups, due to the small size of the vessels, similar to the blood vessels of the mouth and gums; or in a denuded member without flesh, similar to the nose and its surroundings.**
**And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups which are in the waters of digestion and purgation.**
**And it is left the day and night in water until they are famished, and no cause remains in the belly of those; and it is evacuated the body by phlebotomy and bloodletting; and the member of the patient is thoroughly washed until it becomes red; and it is placed on it.**
**And when they are filled and stopped.**
**And if it is possible to suck out the place with bloodletting, it is more direct in judgment.**
**And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and water, and be squeezed and expressed.**
**And if the blood is prolonged in the body near the closure of the bloodletting cups, and this liquid begins to run out, then put a cloth soaked in cold water on it, and keep it there until the bleeding stops.**
**And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol powder or powdered gallnuts and similar substances of stiptic causes over it, until the blood is absorbed; or place the warm poultices on the location and leave them until they adhere to the location, and the blood is absorbed.**
**And thus, if necessary, iteration of bloodletting cups, when it is possible to change those.**
**And if the bloodletting cups are prohibited from suspension, then wash the location with recent blood or leave an acupuncturist's needle in the area until there is bleeding; and be careful, because those that feel some blood will soon absorb it.**
**And when you want to stop them, sprinkle a little bit of powdered aloes, or salt, or ashes, and then cauterize.**
**Thus begins the third part: of restoration.** **This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.**
**Oh, foolish son, understand that those who boast about this chapter are the ignorant doctors and common people, and those who have not read the books of the Ancients nor glanced at a letter from them.**
**And because of this reason, it is made that this method of the sages in our land is private; and you must not forget it at any time, nor attribute anything to chance, but only through the prolonged reading of the books of the Ancients and study on their understanding, until I extract the science from them.**
**And thus, I have directed my efforts towards experiment and study in the length of my own life.**
**And you have already been described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiment has passed; therefore, I have briefly presented it to you others and released it from the occupation of elongation; and have summarized it at the end of summarization; and have shown it at the end of declaration; and have formed it into many forms of instruments that are administered in this way, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I did in two previous chapters.**
**Chapter One.**
**Summary and collections from fractured bones, for which a previous necessity is required before we begin to remember the members of fractures and their various forms.** **Therefore, let us say in the preamble to this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and let us consider the headings under which the artists are forced to stand at attention regarding the truth of these matters; so it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art, other than yourselves.**
**And thus I say that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twisting or separation, then it is necessary for you to turn back to the beginning with phlebotomy or to alleviate that, or whatever else together, if no obstacle prevents it, just as debility of virtue, or the one who suffers it, or old age, or time of intense heat, or of intense cold.**
**And thus it is content in its own food of fresh herbs and fowl meat and crabs; and prohibit gross meats and fill them with viands and all manner of food that fills the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostema and if not fear effusion of matter to the member.**
**And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they are accustomed to.**
**And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of great and strong and heavy consistency, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, and similar substances, and also meat, fish, and eggs, and thick soups, and milk of cows, and juices of fresh fruits, and all sorts of food that are similar to these, and under this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture is done more easily and gently.**
**And you should know that the bones are brittle when they are in old men who are in their first old age and in those who are decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the members of theirs.**
**But nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of all parts without any similar cause, like glue that thickens and adheres to it, until it is conjoined and joined together, until the end of fortitude and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents that from its works.**
**And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which are gravity and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.**
**And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the femur is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the foot is different from a fracture of the arm; and similarly all the other members are different between them.**
**And you should remember all the species of fracture, exposed in its own chapter distinct from others.**
**Many different kinds of fracture in itself.** **And the species of fracture are diversified in their own kinds; for there is a curved fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some times it is made according to the length of the bone: and these are fractures of the satagia and astelhas and additio
**And every species has its own unique pain or torment in the process of restoration, according to the distinct memory of each place.**
**Many signs of bone fracture.** **And for this reason it is known that there is a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of the bone, and the prominence or swelling of the bone to the sense, and when you compress the bone with your hand.**
**And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or prominence and you do not feel a sense of resistance when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the patient experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.**
**It is possible that there may be twisting or small fissure, therefore it does not matter if you compress the bone with your hand and all its surroundings; but rather pause over it, taking into account the medicines of which there is memory in this moment, which corresponds to this place; and so be strict by subtle subtlety.**
**And you should know that the place when it is curved and not split in two or another way that does not occur in the satagia, as all parts of its comparison are remade, then it is necessary to begin from your hour to correct it, having taken into account what will happen apostema caution.**
**And if apostema caution occurs at that place, then let it be left for several days until the apostema ceases; and then equalize it according to each manner that you can with lightness and ingenuity.**
**And you should know that the restoration and equalization of the bone is easier than in the case where satagia occurs.**
**And so strengthen that according to what will come in the memory of it.**
**However, if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, whether it be the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and hand.**
**And be in the position with which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then you will be forced to return those additions with ingenuity and according to each manner that you can in their places.**
**And take care to follow your strength, so that what you do does not harm the patient through your operation or injury; and strive according to your power to apply one bone to another, their companion in better forms.**
**And it is necessary that at that hour you act with profit and touch that place with your hand, and if there is some other cause here, correct that and equalize that according to the quantity of your virtue.**
**And excessive extension and compression, just as foolish doctors often do, which cause apostema caution to occur through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, just as we have seen before through the operation of theirs.**
**And the quality of the strictura of the member at rest is that which you recommend; because you know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.**
**And of those that are small, like the arm and leg and foot, it is necessary that the wrapping be made of very fine cloth.**
**But those that are large, like the thigh or leg, it is necessary that they be wrapped in a thick and strong cloth, because the gentle wrapping connects the large member and strengthens it from all parts with a strict equalization, so that nothing enters into it.**
**And thus, begin, and with your evacuation of equacio, pause momentarily convenient to that place, over the location of that fracture with three or four wraps as the member requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the wrapping.**
**And thus, come to that part of the location of the fracture which is most superior, and strengthen more than not so as to keep your strictura with which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.** **And thus, stretch yourself to the wrapping of the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the strictura bit by bit, until you take from it a great part.**
**And thus, take another bandage and wrap it around that other spot on the broken location with wrapping, and thus come to the wraps at the most distant part of the fracture; and be your operation in the strictura of the wrapping and in mollification of that according to what we have said in the first wrapping above.**
**And thus, pause between the wrappings of stopa leon or cloth with which the twisting of the fracture is equalized, if there is twisting in it; and if not, you do not pause.**
**And thus, pause over another bandage, and thus equalize over these wrapping stars made decently soon, if in the location there is no inflammation or cautionary apostema, and then pause over that which seats the apostema and prevents the inflation; and leave it for a few days; and then you strengthen over those stars.**
**And the stars of the wrapping are made of the middle part of canna lada reed, and well formed; or they are made of ash wood; or of palm tree branches; and the width of each star is according to this form and figure:**
**However, it is necessary that the star which is paused over that fracture be a bit larger and thicker than the other stars, and the length of the star according to what is measured by the member in magnitude and smallness; and thus strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first strictura; and thus bind above with a cord decently according to what we have said about strictura, and it should be your strictura according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as is lengthened from the fracture, so much less the strictura.**
**And it is necessary that the threads be of a moderate thickness and subtlety, and be made of silk; and if the threads are thick, just as I have seen in the operation of certain foolish people who pause their threads with cords of twisted silk, and it is a great error, when the strictura is not in equalization.**
**And it is not necessary to use very fine threads, because you will not consecrate with them according to the strictura that you want, and it does not matter if between star and star there are less than a digit.**
**And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to the strictura in its own locations, then pause with those of stopa leon or woolly camel hair until it does not cause harm.**
**In some cases, the fracture is accompanied by a plague, and accidents of disruption occur in the code, and you will come with remembrance in that one in the capital according to singularity.**
**And you should know that not every broken member is strengthened with stars on the first day; the reason being that the member, when it is large, does not need to be paused over by stars immediately, but rather after a few days or seven or more, according to your safety precautions for cautionary apostema.**
**And this is the method of the ointments with which the Ancients restored, which are paused over fractures and dislocations and torsions.**
**Method of ointment like a refreshing balm for the restoration of fracture, suitable for many complexities and most particularly for women and children, since it is applied to that which does not feel heat or cold: and it is that you take from powder of millstone, and it is the marrow of the flour that falls off the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill.**
**And thus it is comfortable as it is, unless you sift through it with an album of honey, and pause the thickening or thinning; and then use it.**
Another method for applying an ointment to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the essence of sage, one drachma ten; of myrrh and aloes, one drachma five; of alochil, one drachma twenty; all are mixed with water or album of hog's gall if the patient's complexion is scorched; and then use this ointment, which has a good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to old men.
Another method for applying an ointment that restores fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh and white altai, one drachma ten; of myrrh and aloe, one drachma five; of acacia, one drachma six; of Armenian balsam, one drachma twenty.
**All are to be pounded in a mortar with a wooden pestle, and sifted, and mixed with water or honey, and administered.**
**Method of ointment for joints and bones separated from their places, and sudden pain occurring in those and fissures and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in sweet wine and olive oil and pause over the location.**
**But in this ointment there is no virtue of restoration, of cautionary apostema and propelling out pains properly.**
**Another method of ointment that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix all together and make an ointment from them.**
**Short method of ointment to be administered for the restoration of fracture of bone and when you desire resolution of the remnant of apostema: recipe razed from alta, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of ears, all mixed together.** **And all are to be pounded and mixed with wine, if the member is not scarred.**
**But if it is scarred, labor and comfort that one with water of colandro moist or with water and use of lead.**
**Another method of ointment more powerful in resolution than the first, when apostema persists and hinders the restoration of the member: recipe razed from alta and seed of lily, and balm, melilot, majoram, flowers of violet, camomile, all mixed together.**
**But Hippocrates does not advise freely that it should be applied to the member torn apart for its restoration, but rather a composition of wax and oil is made and no other cause; and recommends that it should be mixed between grossness and subtlety.**
**But at Gualia it is seen that it should be applied to the member torn apart for its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with a small degree of heat like myrrh, onions, and similar substances are used just as those causes which have been recommended.**
**Method of ointment that comforts lesions and pain: recipe mixed with cypress, human hair shaved or bird's feather, and alta, and salt, all mixed together; pound and sifted and mixed, and made into an ointment.**
**But the quantity according to which it should be left to remain in the wound and how it should be divided is that you consider whether there is not pain or pruritus or if the bone is broken and not in its place, then you do not want to leave it for many days.** **And if it happens that a violent pain or pruritus or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should withdraw or remove that in the hour, and stop the application of the ointment.**
**And take linen cloth and marine sponge lioness wet, and immerse that in boiling water, and with that wash the location until the pruritus ceases and the pain is calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then pause over it with fine wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or red oil, and lie on it for a night until you are sure of caution from apostema, and that inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain of it is eased.**
**And then gently iterate that subtle stricture and small ointment, and do not strain it with your first constriction, and subtlety apply it until it is healed.**
**And if at times the apostema and the rigor and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are completely gone, and you need ointment and stricture, then you should iterate that in the same way as you did at the beginning equally.**
**And if there is no cause in the member that we have said, then you should not leave it until at least three or four or five or seven days.** **and some times everything is left for 20 days according to how it appears to you by the relaxation of the member, just as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that.**
**And then adjust in the stricture more than your first constriction all, and adjust in the thickening of the flesh of the patient, according to how it is preceded by the remembrance of that.**
**But if you find the location of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching that; and therefore, take up that with boiling water every time you remove that; and do this for all three days; and relax the stricture a little, and by this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and is healed gradually.**
**But this is what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do another way when it is not restored at first, according to what is right, and is restored in a tortuous manner, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they had written this out fully, the Ancients would have added more to this.**
**And I have not seen anyone of them do this, therefore it is more reasonable that this does not happen.**
**Chapter 2: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.**
**The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by percussion of space, and the percussion breaks all the bone into small pieces, leaving it like a stick, and therefore this species is called asciatical; or the space insinuates itself into some part of the bone, and insinuates itself into the flesh and does not pass through to the other side; and this species of fracture is called levatio absoluta.**
**And the wound of these two fractures is either great or small, and of fracture that is concave or convex; and cause of it is percussion with a hammer or falling on the forehead, and to their likenesses.**
**And this fracture is either penetrating, which approaches the panniculus (fatty tissue) that is left behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is either great or small.**
**And the fracture is one that is split in the bone, in the subtlety of hair small, and therefore it is named this species fracture capillary.**
**And it is a fracture that is caused by falling or percussion of the forehead and similar, which causes some bone plate to enter into the inward parts, and is done in the concavity as if it were happening to the skulls of the ancient ones when they were hit by percussion and their entrance was broken into the inward parts.**
**And most of the time it is done in the skulls of human beings, just as if they were made by children.**
**And all these types of fractures that are scattered, are as bad as stars separated.** **And you will remember everything about this in its place.**
**And you will know all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their causes and showing the corrupted flesh that is on them.**
**And the species of fracture capillar is known by this that it is discovered on the bone, and it is wiped away, and it is lined over there with a tent, because the fracture appears black.**
**But in the treatment of fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient, and then if you find that they are accompanied by manifest signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of speech, syncope, acute fever, and swelling of the eyes and rigor of those, and similar manifestations to theirs in greater dispositions, unless the doctor is not cured.**
**And if there are non-corresponding accidents, you hope for salvation, then you begin the treatment of him.**
**The cause is that if it has come to you like a plague in the beginning as it is plagued and this is on the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the examination of the bone before the 14th day according to all disposition.**
**And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you cover the bone before the 7th day, having that which is left on the bone be corrupted by the panniculus, and that accidents occur as we have recommended.**
**And if the fracture has already penetrated to the panniculus and covered the brain, and is in small parts and concavity, then it is necessary that you inscribe the comminuted and attrited part, according to what I have recommended to you.**
**And that you reason with the patient's head plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner to your possibility, and that it be lighter on the patient.**
**And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone is required, or there is a flow of blood or an abscess that is warm, then you should oppose yourself to it in accordance with what is necessary, and do as follows: fill the wound with infusions of vinegar and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is sedated, and ensure that the flow of blood is stopped; and begin with the excision of the bone and the removal of the affected area.**
**And it should be done according to one of two ways of operation.**
**And the one way is that you inscribe the bone with an inscription of straight line, and this is the form of it: And then administer another inscription to this, a little more late than that; and this is the form of it:**
**And then administer the inscription, but later than the second.**
**And it is necessary that you have different inscriptions, some of which are longer than others; and some of theirs are shorter than the others and are in the later stage of their extremities, and are made of iron or lead.**
**And use them according to their facility in percussion on the inscription, so that it does not concuss the head and lead it astray.**
**And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circle of it before you administer the inscriptions with the non-profound tunnels.**
**And they are not called so simply because those do not stop the term of the bone from reaching to that which is near it, for this reason the tunnel is rounded extremity or margin on that which is left the head of it, resembling a margin or little circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.**
**And it is convenient that you take many of these tunnels, each one fitting the particular shape of some bone, until you are present in all the tests of the skull, the edge of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of the shape of this test.**
**And this is the form of three species of tunnels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the tunnel on the bone and revolve it with those same words until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then permit the tunnel to pass to another place, and pause there where it is between all the holes the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around it.**
**And then inscribe with inscriptions that are between each hole of the bone, and make it more subtle than you can on this side in the end of levitation, just as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared to this, such as tweezers and forceps.**
**And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the inscriber does not touch any cause of the ciphac.**
**And therefore, when you have perforated the bone with the tunnel, and it is separated from the ciphac if it continues to it, and you will have that extracted, it is necessary that you reason and equalize it in the roughness of it with another instrument similar to an inscriber, but more powerful and more subtle than the others.**
**And if there remains some small part of the bones, it is necessary that you take it with ease with the tools that are yours; and then cure the wound with linens and bandages which we have said.**
**And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which says Gualia and praises it greatly; and this is its sermon: necessary is to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone at the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and have paused there with the end of this inscriber, slow and happy, which has this form:**
**And it is that the lenticular part is lion and does not inscribe any cause, and the acute part is two inches in length on either side before reaching the end of the bone, as times; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the ciphac with the face of the acute part in the bone.**
**And then strike with the inscriber on one side with a small hammer until you have inscribed all the bone with ease just as it is revolved, and you are sure of the padding that no accident will happen to you in any way, and if the medicant14 were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, even if he were asleep.**
**And therefore, if there remains any cause annexed to the bone of the padding in some places of the bone, inscribe it with the end of the inscriber that is lenticular, and deliver it with ease, because it is delivered from its trouble and fear.**
**And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the padding, and what is abscessed or is left behind from the bone is the face of it, and remains in roughness and subtlety, then it is necessary that you smooth out that roughness and radiate those subtleties with razors subtle by which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it may be possible to administer those in every place the most convenient for them and the most right according to what has puzzled you your operation on that broken bone and its figure.**
**And it is necessary that you administer in your reason with which you sharpen the bone at the beginning with the most rough of those razors, and then use the most subtle one of them, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you arrive at administering the most powerful and the most subtle of all.**
**But in any of the other small fractures, capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer cure according to what has puzzled you for rectification of it.**
**And it is a cause that is not fully understood by all those who have studied in that art.** **And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.**
**And if the padding is rectangular when you radiate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a cloth from it according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosy oil, and pause it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in vinegar and rosy oil, and pause it over the first cloth and make it as smooth as possible so that you do not injure the ciphac; and then administer a binding bandage over it, and do not tighten it except by the quantity of the wound as much as is necessary.**
**And leave it with this cure for one day or two until you are sure of a post-emptive caution; and then remove it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as razings of flax and farina of ears, and powder of senses and aristology, and similar things to those.**
**And it is that you should make a powder of these medicines which is powdered over the wound, just as they are dry; and universally, administer in that all medicine with properties of which one cleanses and does not bite.**
**And keep yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in a surdica of enguent or other; nor leave viral inflammation to arise there; for when it is adjusted over the padding of the skull, corrupts that and spoils that, and brings evil upon the patient from nearby malignant malice.**
**And evil occurs in the skull of the head, as if the bone is blackened and most especially when the cure is neglected, and there is darkness on the surface; and therefore consider now if evil befalls the patient with the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious for all doubt.**
**And if there is no blackness but from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then you should take three parts of honey and three parts of rosy oil.** **And with those lines, make a cloth, and then pause it over the skull; and then cure that with the species of cure that is needed until it is healed.**
It seems we've reached the end of Chapter 3!
A new chapter!
It seems we're getting into the nitty-gritty of nasal anatomy!
It seems like we're getting a description of how to treat a broken nose! It seems like we're getting some final advice on how to perform the nasal manipulation technique!
It seems like we're getting some more specific guidance on how to treat a broken nose!
It seems like we're getting some guidance on how to treat a broken nose with two separate fractures!
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to restore the nose (restauracio de lu) after a fracture!
It seems like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a broken nose!
It seems like we're getting some additional instructions on how to treat a broken nose!
It seems like we're getting some additional information on how to treat a broken nose!
It seems like we're getting some final words of advice from the author!
It seems like we're getting some additional advice on how to treat a broken nose!
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the nose after it has been broken!
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken nose with a small or comminuted fracture (si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz)!
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a wound inside the nose (si accideys plagua dedintz le nas)!
It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 4!
A new chapter!
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when the fracture is not accompanied by a wound (plaga).
It seems like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when the fracture is not accompanied by a wound (plaga).
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when the fracture is more severe and has separated into two parts.
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a broken jaw (mandibula) when there is also disruption of the teeth (conmocio de dentz a disrupcio).
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to care for the patient (malaute) after a broken jaw (mandibula).
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's appearance (figur) if it has been altered in some way.
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's bone (os) and ensure that it heals properly.
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat an abscess (apostema) that has developed in the patient.
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a fracture with an open wound (fractura am plagua).
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat a wound with a narrow opening (le orrifici de la plagua es streyt).
It seems like we're getting some advice on how to treat the wound after removing any debris or foreign material.
It looks like we've reached the end of Chapter 5!
A new chapter!
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a broken rib (furcula) that is fractured in one of three ways.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a broken rib (furcula) that is fractured in different ways.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to perform an operation (operacio) when the fracture is accompanied by a wound or open sore (plaga).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to set the fracture (enguala la fractura) so that it heals properly.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to apply extension (extencio) to the patient's body.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to position the patient's body (malaute) when it's not possible to extend the ribcage (furcula) to its full extent.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to assist the patient (ministre) in elevating their ribcage (os de la furcula) when it's blocked by a tumor or other obstruction (preon).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to deal with debris or foreign material (satagias) that has accumulated in the patient's ribcage (furcula).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to perform an incision (inscisio) on the patient's ribcage (os) when the debris or foreign material is stuck.
It seems like we're getting some information on the shape and size of the cutting tool (culier) used to make an incision in the patient's ribcage.
It seems like we're getting some information on the shape and size of the cutting tool (culier) used to make an incision in the patient's ribcage.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to close a wound (plauga) after removing debris or foreign material from the patient's ribcage.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a wound (plauga) after removing debris or foreign material from the patient's ribcage.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat an abscess (apostema) that has formed in the patient's ribcage.
It seems like we're getting some additional information on how to care for the patient's fractured ribcage (os trencat).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to position the patient (malaute) during sleep.
It seems like we're getting some information on the duration of the treatment.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to update the dressing (emplastre) used to treat the patient's fractured ribcage.
It seems like we're getting some information on the duration of the healing process.
It seems like we've reached the end of the text. The "Capitol" refers to a chapter or section title, indicating that there are multiple sections or chapters within the text.
It seems like we've reached the end of the text, and it appears that the title is "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla", which translates to "On the Treatment of Shoulder Fractures".
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a fracture in the scapula (tart).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a fracture in the scapula (tart) where it's broken at the middle of the bone (mieg loc de lu).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to prepare the area for treatment and apply a dressing.
It seems like we're getting some additional information on how to prepare the area for treatment and apply a dressing.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to apply the dressing and secure it in place.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to check and maintain the dressing.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to position the patient.
It seems like we're getting some information on the expected recovery time for a fractured scapula (spatula).
It seems like we're getting some information on how to remove the dressing (liament) once the scapula has fully healed.
It seems like we're getting some information on how to treat a complication that can arise when removing the dressing (codena) after a scapula fracture.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The "Capitol" refers to a chapter or section title, indicating that there are multiple sections or chapters within the text.
It looks like we've reached a new chapter in the text!
It looks like we're getting some information on the diagnosis and characteristics of fractures of the foot (pietz).
It looks like we're getting some information on the symptoms and consequences of a fracture in the middle of the foot (delos accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu).
It looks like we're getting some information on the treatment and rehabilitation process for a fracture in the middle of the foot (La restauracio de lu).
It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply and secure the dressing (emplastre) over the fracture site.
It looks like we're getting some information on what to do if complications arise during the treatment of a fracture in the foot.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The "Capitol" refers to a chapter or section title, indicating that there are multiple sections or chapters within the text.
It looks like we've reached a new section of the text!
It looks like we're getting some information on the characteristics of rib fractures! It looks like we're getting some information on how to diagnose and examine a patient with a suspected rib fracture!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat and rehabilitate a patient with a rib fracture!
It looks like we're getting some information on the symptoms and complications that can arise when a rib fracture is severe or complex.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
It looks like we've finally reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of the text!
It looks like we've finally reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the beginning of a new chapter (Capitol .ix.)!
It looks like we're diving into a new topic: "De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col" - or, in English, "On the Treatment of Fracture of the Spine and Neck".
It looks like we're starting to get some specific information about the treatment of fractures in the spine and neck (spondil del dos). It looks like we're getting to the heart of the matter!
It looks like we're getting a glimmer of hope!
It looks like we're getting some more insight into the diagnosis and treatment of fractures in the spine and neck (spondils del col)!
It looks like we're getting to the crux of the matter!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to diagnose and treat fractures in the spine or neck!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck!
It looks like we're moving on to the next chapter (Capitol .x.) of the ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we're diving into a new topic - "De restauracio de la ancha"!
It looks like we're discussing the treatment of fractures in the spine or neck (les osses de las anchas tart so trencats)!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (la restauracio de lu)!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament)!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos)! It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (E donc quan auras engualada aquela)!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the spine or neck (E enguala la concavitat am aquo)!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat abscesses (Mays si accideys apostema caut)!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures (E si accideysso en le os satagias)!
It looks like we're moving on to the next chapter (Capitol .xi.) of the ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we're discussing the treatment of fractures in the arm (De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori)!
I think I can translate that!
It looks like we're getting some specific advice on how to treat fractures in the upper arm (E si es trencat)!
It looks like we're getting more specific instructions on how to treat fractures in the upper arm (E si es trencat)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to position the injured arm (E segua le malaute sobre una sezela)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat fractures in the upper arm (E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu)!
It looks like we're getting another method for treating fractures in the upper arm (E lautra manieyra es)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to strengthen the treatment (E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat fractures near the end of a muscle (E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat fractures near the shoulder blade (E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to apply the bandage or cloth (Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to treat an abscess (Mays si accideys apostema caut)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to strengthen the treatment (E la manieyra de strenher aquela es)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to apply the cloth napkin (E pausa le drap) and strengthen the treatment (strenh sobre le adjutori le bras)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to use splints (E lahoras usa de stelhas)!
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to use splints (E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to strengthen the treatment (E aprop strenh)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to apply the pressure (E es que la tua strictura)! It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to apply the pressure (E quant pus es alonguada la fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to apply the treatment (E donc si vezes)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat an abscess (E si temes apostema caut)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the injured arm (E aprop considera le liament)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the injured arm (Mays si tu yest)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how the patient should rest (E sia la sua dormicio)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the injured arm (E pausa sobre le adjutori)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to feed the patient (E pausa la vianda del malaute)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the patient (Quar de constuma del adjutori)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the patient (E si la fractura es layha atrita)!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
It looks like we're getting a detailed description of the arm (Bras es compost de dos osses)!
It looks like we're getting a description of how the arm can be injured (E fort leu es trencat)!
It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E quan es trencat)!
It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E quan es trencat)!
It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E pus mala)!
It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (Donc si los)!
It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (Mays si le focil)!
It looks like we're getting a description of the treatment and recovery process for a broken arm (E si les dos focils)!
It looks like we're getting some detailed instructions on how to treat a broken arm (E cove que pauses)!
It looks like we're getting some more detailed instructions on how to treat a broken arm (E sia un coyssi)!
It looks like we're getting some more detailed instructions on how to treat a broken arm (E aprop le ministre)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a broken bone (E aprop le metge)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to deal with a tricky situation (E si en la factura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to deal with a particularly challenging situation (E si appar en lu satagia)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to handle a special case (Mays si la fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat an abscess or apostema (E si accideys apostema)!
It looks like we're getting some information about the types of splints or stelas that can be used to treat different types of fractures (E sapias quel nombre de las stelas)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply a splint or stela (E aprop pausa)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to prepare the cloth or drap (E les draps) used to wrap around a fractured bone!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the patient (E considera)! It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a complication that requires correction (E si accideys alcuna causa)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the patient (E leysses)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to complete the treatment (E si la extrictura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to provide nutrition and support for the patient (E considera)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat the patient (Mays si al malaute)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to care for the patient (E aprop sia)!
It looks like we're getting some final words of wisdom on the expected recovery time for this fracture (E sapias)!
It looks like we're at the end of the manuscript! The last chapter is titled "Capitol.xiii."
It looks like we're diving into a new topic!
It looks like we're getting some important information about fractures in the wrist and fingers!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture or dislocation of the wrist (E quan accideys)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the wrist (E aprop le ministre)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply an emplastre and estopa (E lahoras cove)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a specific type of fracture (Mays si la trincadura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply a splint (stelha) and secure it with cloth (am drap) (E sia la stelha)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture that occurs in the outer part of the hand (Mays si la fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of one of the fingers (E si accideys fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat fractures of the other fingers (Mays si la fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some final thoughts on the treatment of fractures and other injuries (E considera)!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xiv)!
It looks like we're diving into a new topic! The title "De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa" translates to "On the Treatment of Fractures of the Coccyx".
It looks like we're getting some specific information about the treatment of fractures to the coccyx (Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E la restauracio de lu)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E aprop le ministre)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx that requires additional support (Mays si es propdana)!
It looks like we're getting some additional instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E semblantment si la trencadura)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat a fracture of the coccyx (E aprop le metge)! It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to treat an infection (apostema) that develops after a fracture of the coccyx (Mays si accideys en lu apostema)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to create a splint (strictura) for the fractured coccyx (La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to create a splint for the fractured coccyx (E intromet lonc fiel)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply a splint to the fractured coccyx (E aprop pausa)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply padding and secure the splint (E aprop uempli)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to create a splint (E aprop comensa)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to secure the splint (E aprop exten)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply the splint and ensure proper healing (E aprop leyssa)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to manage a situation where the bone is protruding (Mays si en le os es pessa)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to apply the splint (E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda)!
It looks like we're getting some instructions on how to prevent complications during the treatment of a fracture (Mays empero en la restauracio de lu)!
It looks like we're getting some information on the expected recovery time for a fracture of the coccyx (E sapias que la coyssa)!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xv.)!
It looks like we're starting a new chapter in the manuscript (De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh)!
It looks like we're getting some information on the symptoms and complications of fractures to the coccyx (Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol)!
It looks like we're getting some information on the severity of fractures to the coccyx (Mays si accideys a lu fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some information on the treatment and restoration of fractures to the coccyx (E la restauracio de lu)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply an emplastre (a type of dressing) and a splint to the affected area (E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to consider all the possible complications that can arise during treatment and recovery (E aprop considera)!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xvi.)!
It looks like we're starting a new chapter in the manuscript (De restauracio de la fractura de la camba)!
It looks like we're getting some information about the anatomy of the hip bone (Sapias que en la camba)!
It looks like we're getting some information about the different types of fractures that can occur in the hip bone (E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some information about what happens when two bones in the hip joint are fractured (E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps)!
It looks like we're getting some information about what happens when the smaller bone in the hip joint is fractured (E si es trinquat le os pus subtil)!
It looks like we're getting some information about what happens when the larger bone in the hip joint is fractured (E si es trincat le os pus gros)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures in the hip joint (E aprop aministra)!
It looks like we're getting some additional information about how to treat fractures in the hip joint (Mays empero cove)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to perform a surgical procedure on the hip joint (E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a bandage or wrapping (E aprop envolopa)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply splints or stelhas (E aprop lias las doas stelhas)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a type of splint or support (E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a type of splint or support in the case of a fracture (E majorment cove)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to monitor and manage the recovery process after a fracture (E aprop considera)!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xvii.)!
It looks like we're getting some information about fractures affecting the ankle and foot (De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz)!
It looks like we're getting some information about the frequency and severity of fractures affecting the ankle and foot (Al talo no accideys fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some information about the treatment of fractures affecting the small bones of the foot (E si als osses del pe endeve fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the small bones of the foot (E aprop pausa)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating a fracture (E aprop pausa emplastre)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating a fracture (E aprop strenh)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to monitor and manage the healing process after a fracture (E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractured toes (Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz)! It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating a fractured toe (E aprop pausa)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply a splint or bandage after treating multiple fractured toes (Mays si aquo que es trincat)!
It looks like we're getting some final words of wisdom from the manuscript (E es convenient)!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xviii.)!
It looks like we're getting into the final stretch of the manuscript (De fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (Quan le conh de la femna es trincat)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E aprop)!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E aprop)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E fassa)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to use an ovine bladder as a makeshift splint (E si voles)!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to treat fractures affecting the pelvis (E aprop sia)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures affecting the spine (E quan le os del pentenil)!
It looks like we're getting some final thoughts and reflections from the author (E aquo que es)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures of the penis (Mays en la vergua del home)!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript (Capitol .xix.)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures when they are accompanied by a wound (De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua)!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat fractures when they are accompanied by a wound, and particularly when the fracture involves a large bone such as the pelvis or femur (Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage bleeding wounds (E si la plagua eflueys sanc)!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat fractures (E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura)!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat abscesses (Mays si accideys apostema)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to treat fractures of the spine (Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to use a specific instrument, likely a type of forceps or clamp, to reduce and align the fractured bone (Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas)!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to perform the operation (E sia redon)!
It looks like we're getting some information on the physical characteristics of the patient (E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz)!
It looks like we're reaching the end of the manuscript (E aquesta es la forma de lu)!
It looks like we're getting a quote in Greek (E es nompnat en grec)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to position the patient's extremity (Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply pressure and realign the bone (E inpelleys aquel)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to realign the fractured bone (E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz)!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to handle situations where the bone cannot be fully reduced (Mays si no podes reduzir le os)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to remove the remaining bone fragments (E aprop ratz aquel)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to assess the outcome of the treatment (E cum le os es reduzit)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to apply a dressing (Cum es complida la tua restauracio)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to administer stitches and apply dressings (E aprop aministra stelas)!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to avoid causing further harm (E guarda te am tota cautela)! It looks like we're getting some information on how to recognize and diagnose the type of fracture (E si la tieua strictura)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage severe wounds (E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage wound care (E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage the recovery process (E conveneys a tu)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to assess the progress of a wound (si a la plagua passan motz dias)! It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage abscesses (E de aquelas satagias)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage infection or corruption (E si accideys a la plagua)!
It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage the treatment of fractures (E de aquo en le qual cove)! It looks like we're getting some information on how to manage the treatment of wounds (e lahoras cura la plagua)!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
It looks like we're starting a new chapter (Capitol .xx.) that focuses on the treatment of swelling or edema that can occur in the aftermath of a fracture!
It looks like we're diving into the discussion of swelling (nodacio) that can occur after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some practical advice on how to manage swelling (nodacio) after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some more advice on how to manage swelling (nodacio) after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some more advice on how to manage swelling (nodacio) after a fracture!
It looks like we're reaching the end of this manuscript!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some additional advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture!
It looks like we're reaching the end of this manuscript!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the healing process of fractured bones!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage swelling and bruising after a fracture!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the rehabilitation process of a fractured limb!
It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we're diving into a new topic: De sermo en dislocacio, which translates to "On Dislocation".
It looks like we're diving into a discussion about joint dislocation!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage joint dislocations!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the pain and discomfort associated with joint dislocations!
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage the healing process after a joint dislocation!
It looks like we're getting some final advice on how to manage the healing process after a joint dislocation!
It looks like we're getting some final instructions on how to organize the chapters of this ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to treat a dislocation of the jawbone (mandibula).
It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to treat a dislocation of the jawbone (mandibula).
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat a minor jawbone dislocation.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat a more severe jawbone dislocation.
It looks like we're getting some specific instructions on how to perform a jawbone reduction (reduccio) for a dislocated jaw.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage a difficult jawbone reduction (reduccio) when both mandibulas are dislocated.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient after the jawbone reduction (reduccio) is complete.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to care for the patient after the jawbone reduction (reduccio) is complete.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to help the patient recover from the jawbone reduction (reduccio) procedure.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manage a difficult situation where two jawbones (mandibulas) are dislocated and not returning to their normal positions.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to recognize the importance of proper treatment for jawbone dislocations.
It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to treat a dislocation of the clavicle (furcula) and the end of the muscle.
It looks like we're getting some specific information about the clavicle (furcula) and its relationship to the lat muscles.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to restore the patient's comfort and mobility after a dislocation of the clavicle. It looks like we're getting some advice on how to manipulate the clavicle back into place after a dislocation.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's clavicle after a dislocation.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the end of the clavicle that is not dislocated, but rather stuck in place.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the patient's clavicle after a dislocation or stuck condition.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat the end of the muscle that has become separated from its normal location.
It looks like we've reached the end of this ancient medical manuscript!
It looks like we're getting into some specific advice on how to reduce a dislocation of the muscle.
It looks like we're getting some specific information about how muscles can become dislocated.
It looks like we're getting more information about how muscles can become dislocated.
It looks like we're getting some more information about how muscles can become dislocated.
It looks like we're getting some information about what can happen when a muscle becomes dislocated.
It looks like we're getting some advice on how to treat a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to recognize and distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to recognize a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce (put back into place) a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about what to do if the muscle doesn't return to its normal position after treatment.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce (put back into place) a dislocated muscle. It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle that is not too severe.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce (put back into place) a dislocated muscle using a different method.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle that is difficult to reduce.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply the beam treatment.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply the beam treatment.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to apply the beam treatment.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to promote healing in a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to promote healing in a dislocated muscle.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about the consequences of not properly treating a dislocated joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce a dislocated joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to promote healing in a dislocated joint.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The last line says:
It looks like we've reached the title of a new chapter! The text says:
It looks like we're getting some information about the nature of a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about the importance of prompt reduction and treatment in cases of knee joint dislocation.
It looks like we're getting some information about the process of reducing a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some additional information about the process of reducing a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about what to do if the dislocation doesn't respond to reduction.
It looks like we're getting some information about the process of extending a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about the process of wrapping a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about the process of reducing a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about the post-reduction care for a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about the final stages of treatment for a dislocated knee joint.
It looks like we're getting some information about what to do if the joint doesn't seem to be healing properly.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint that is experiencing gravity or weight-related issues. It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint that is experiencing movement-related issues. Corruption has already occurred on the inner surface of the wound, up to where it is linen.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat a dislocated joint using a cow's hide (fenda de vaca) and heat.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final title!
It looks like we're getting some information about the treatment of a dislocated wrist joint (malassen).
It looks like we're getting some information about how to reduce a dislocated wrist joint (malassen).
It looks like we're getting some additional information about how to reduce a dislocated wrist joint (malassen).
It looks like we're getting some information about how to handle the situation if the dislocation doesn't reduce immediately.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to handle a wrist joint that is not reducing properly.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for the wrist joint after it has been dislocated and reduced.
It looks like we're getting some information about how to handle a situation where the wrist joint is not moving properly and causing discomfort.
We've reached the end of the text!
The final title!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat finger dislocations!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to treat finger dislocations that occur at the base of the palm or in the wrist area!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for the finger after it has been manipulated back into place!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to progress with finger care after the initial stabilization period!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to continue caring for the finger after it has been mobilized!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for a wrist dislocation!
It looks like we're getting some information about how to care for wrist dislocations in other areas!
We've reached the end of the text!
The final title!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final paragraph!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The title!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final paragraph!
The final paragraph!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final paragraph!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final paragraph!
The final paragraph!
The final instruction!
The final instructions!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final instruction!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we're diving into the specifics of hip joint dislocation!
It looks like we're discussing the signs and symptoms of hip joint dislocation!
It looks like we're discussing the steps to restore a dislocated hip joint!
It looks like we're discussing the signs of a successfully reduced dislocation!
It looks like we're discussing the post-reduction care for a dislocated hip joint!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of rest and recovery after a dislocation!
It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper stretching and rehabilitation after a dislocation!
We've reached the end of the text!
A new chapter!
It looks like we're discussing the causes and types of ankle dislocations!
It looks like we're discussing the signs of ankle dislocation!
It looks like we're discussing the treatment of ankle dislocation!
It looks like we're discussing the treatment of ankle dislocation when it's a more severe case (segunda compliment)!
It looks like we're getting into the nitty-gritty of ankle dislocation treatment!
It looks like we're getting into the nitty-gritty of ankle dislocation treatment!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final message!
The final caution!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final caution!
The final instruction!
The final instruction! The final warning!
The final warning!
We've reached the end of the medieval medical text on treating dislocated ankles!
The final topic!
The first instruction!
Another instruction!
Another instruction!
The final instruction!
We've reached the end of the medieval medical text on treating dislocated ankles!
The final topic!
The final warning!
The final words of wisdom! The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final words of wisdom! The final words! Amen indeed!
