Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequence in it, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you complete what I have written in this treatise, which is part of the operation of my own hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation of my hand is spread out in our region and in our time, entirely private, until the force of its science is felt, and its vigilance is stopped; and there remain no remnants of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the more and induce error and hesitation until the intentions of it are closed and its strength is elongated and its art.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this hand in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for which comes with the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no one has been found to be a skilled artist in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that it covers the entire actor within, which must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes Galen's knowledge until they know the juvenation of members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the consciousness of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their inclination; and of pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their sediment.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that a name is vain, unless it is manifest in the small work, and mainly in the art of medicine.
But we have already said this about that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not evacuated from error, for which they will die, just as you have seen many of them, because they are formatted in this science and get away from that science and its experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incidentally made an incision on the neck of a woman, and incidentally cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman almost died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed into his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and tried to extract that stone with an instrument of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and I saw that due to the greatness of the stone and due to the disposition of the patient's body, he could not overcome it and would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a crude incision on the black crust which was devouring his fracture in the thigh; and with the doctor's ignorance, he estranged the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and astelas in a strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dislocated the joints according to his foolish desires, and then he relaxed, and then he left it for some days and commanded that we should not disturb the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot became apostematous, and he brought about loss.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and he has been revealed to dislocate the limb, and consequently there is tranquility and thus also an increase of his pains.
But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to walk with the corruption in the limb until the patient's condition worsened.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous apostem, and it became ulcerated afterwards for some days, until the malignancy of it was magnified in his lord's sense.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him with iron of all, but rather that it was a member which suffered from all, as if it had been held back.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of my hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there is danger in major dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where I have opposed operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your maladies are felicitated and fortified.
And you will follow the best way for the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and leave behind the terrible maladies of difficult healing, and leave behind your arms from that which makes you afraid, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you are not evasive: because more remains in your glory, and thus also in the world and finally in your sanctities.
Some fevers are released in certain evil humors: There is no bad doctor who does not know the name of a bad disease.
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similar things, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of curvature of twisted limbs and of similar things; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complexity it is prohibited to use cauteries.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cautery and of its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and to me it seems sufficient to take a small part of their sermons, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cauteries universally correspond to all complexity in matter or matters, except for two complexities, which are cold complexities without matter.
In cold and dry complexity with matter they disagree; for some said that cauteries are helpful for that, and others said the contrary of that, that cauteries are not convenient in illnesses which are due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illnesses are healed by hot and dry cauteries.
And I say to him who says the contrary of that, that by cauteries it is made helpful in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complexity of fire, you find men's bodies are fragile.
And I say through the sermon of that, that I have experimented and already discovered many times in my life.
Moreover, I do not think that it is necessary to speak about that which has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter on cauteries by previous exercise, and to know the diversity of complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of illnesses in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those.
Moreover, in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and mainly in fragile and humid illnesses, because already all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree on the help of cauteries in those.
And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cauteries is fire and its goodness, so concerning cauteries I am combining medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not pass except to the member that is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is a small nuisance.
Moreover, the action of combining medicine passes to that in the members where it is united, and strengthens their coming into the ill member with difficult healing and strengthens their assistance.
Moreover, fire, through its sublime quality and good substance, does not do anything but overflow; and it is already known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I am excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my book on this subject, you would have a secret hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion through which it expels illnesses, a philosophical sermon demonstrated, which would be acutely seen in your pious steps.
And you know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to use cauteries and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the nuisance from the accidental time is submerged in the help of that which I have said about cauteries, and mainly if the cauteries are for pains or necessary pains, strong and steadfast, which do not suffer tardiness because they fear those that come with evil, which is greater than small nuisance entering through time.
And thus it is not hidden in your steps, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that illness which is healed by cauteries it is not returned at all times, and pauses that consequence.
And the cause is not seen thus by those who do not understand it, because cauteries are not but in place of medicine which alters the complexity and dries the humidity which are the causes why pains come.
More masters should excel in superficial medicine to validate its value and virtue of their operation and greatness of their lord's sense.
It is possible that the disease returns at some hour of time, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their disease, and its virtue, and what has been prepared in the body by the aggregation of superfluous fluids, and what has been received by it in its acquisition of vices and semblances of those causes; unless the disease in which a cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluous fluids and humidity, thus as a cautery on the teeth for pain and semblance to that, it is possible that in it no return of that pain occurs, but rather it happens in a small way.
And the common speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine nor another cause that profits from cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not but when we administer many ways of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause we administer thus cautery, and it profits from that. And therefore it is clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, but according to the intention which is understood by the common people and foolish doctors.
And they said that ancient people believed that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a breach, as it is not absolutely virtuous, because you already have it probed and experimented that it does not do this except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but more masterfully when you make cautery with a focus of gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and then prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it above the ignition, the gold melts per focus, and also in the focus certain laminas are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
And for this reason, it is done to make cautery with iron, we cannot push lightly and more profoundly into the rectitude of operation.
And now I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can easily find what one wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the accidental service of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of swelling and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the shoulders and ears flowing, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and gout, and universally of all disease that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to be evacuated from medicine lacative mind, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and custom.
And then it commands them to shave their head with a razor, and then make a seat between the thighs above a heated bench and place their hands on their chest.
And then place the razor of your palm then put the fingers on the razor between the nostrils of your nose. More masterfully, as the finger said of my own place is received, it signs that place with tension, and then ignites the cautery olive wood of which this is the form.
And then place that on the place marked with tension, in a way that descends, as which the finger of mine is constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand lightly and regard the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grains of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not turn to your hand in that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the place and let it sit for three days.
And then place it on the covered cloth in a bundle and let it sit until the crust of the focus is destroyed. And then heal the place with angelic tetrafarmacon until it is healthy.
And they said that when the Roman plague was uplifted, so many wounds got healed, because it is better and more youthful.
And they said that some of them who had been cautery-ized on the back bone until to the bone, and held the cautery until it was adhered to some part of the specific bone.
And then you should rasp that which is adhered to the bone, and then you should cure it.
They say that others who apply the cautery to the back, so that it penetrates into the bone strongly, and this is the way of making small incisions: And they think that from that place they extract the vapors from the head.
And it has been held in an open wound for a long time, and then you should cure it until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries at all, unless in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, I am better, for it is said that salvation is when the head is freed from the continuous solution of the same, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first kind of cautery is mostly safe and better, I see; and from that house and in that work, I am saved.
Head according to.
About the cautery of the head.
When the whole head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in a prolonged patient, and uses remedies such as poultices and bandages and capillaries and implants and gauzes and cadels and wadding, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and weak, then that cautery is another cautery below that one. And then you should cauterize above the horn of the sieve-like head with a cautery, so that the cord is divided. Cut the cord and uncover the bone as much as we have recounted and cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is stopped. And lift your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient suffers from great diverse pain due to that, rather than the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery which cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle place of the head; and this is the way of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [humors].
When pain is felt in the head, or it is a sudden pain until the vein, then evacuate with mondifying medicines of the mundane head, and administer another cure, which you have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if it does not profit, then cautery is done in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
One cautery with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrape it and bind the extremities of the hand with both heads. And then you incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet, so that it is in the same location below the cord, so that it is hidden.
And then you strengthen it above the hand that is stopped by constant constriction, and thus it remains for three hours; and then you dissolve the poultice and remove the salt, and thus the wound is opened for two or three days, and then you pause on the underlying part submerged in water until the place forms a crust.
And then you cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, make some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
One cautery with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cautery of which this is the way.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus formed like a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
And then you pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand - so that the artery which is beneath is not hurt - and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it which is hurt by the specification of the cord thus as the magnitude of it, and raise your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not hurt, so that there is no flux of blood.
And then you immerse the part in salt water and pause it on the place, and thus it remains for three days; and then you pause the part well-covered in bandage, and then you cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cautery is done on the extremity of the cutter according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this non-ancient migrating [humors] properly.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of ancient migrating [humors].
When you treat a migrating disease that we have spoken of in the previous treatment, and which we have mentioned in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not abound to what we have said of the first cautery in medicine or of the cautery in focus, then you should ignite the cautery tool within so it is whitened, because it indicates above the line of the long disease which is the greatest part of what has been said; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen it inside to incise the artery and penetrate inside the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not affected by that, so that spasms do not occur.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and mostly to one who ignores what he does and is not skilled and experienced; and thus the operation begins on him at the beginning.
And you will find remedy in remembering the rule of blood flow regulation according to the usual method, at the usual place of this free treatment.
And if you see that this illness does not abound to this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, then cautery it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of straightening of arteries with cautery having two handles, and it is a better cauteryization, more convenient.
Chapter 5.
On the Cauterization of Ear Pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with causative remedies and another treatment which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form:
And place the point at the ignition, and it should be directed towards the environment of the entire ear thus as a wheel is turned around, or in a circle of some sort if the pain is somewhere. Also, you have the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, because then you will feel the spot where you are trying.
And if you cautery multiple points throughout the entire ear, and that is it, and then cure the spots until they are healthy.
Chapter 6.
On the Cauterization of Turture.
Turture, which is treated and cautery is not only for the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that species of turture with herbs and capillary and gargling, and do not complete your treatment, then it is necessary to cautery the illness in three cauteries: the first is at the root of the ear, and the second is a little below the usual temple, and the third is at the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery tool for the opposite part of the ailing area, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery tool in the direction of the extremity of the ear, then slightly above the crown of the head, and in another temple, the length of which is according to the length of the said bone, and pause your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatness of the species of the codeina is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery tool, and it is a species of cutting instrument, the form of which is described in detail. However, it is more subtle because one little thing is thus as you see; and it is necessary to cut in the excessive fat a little.
And then cure the spot where it is described, until it is healthy.
Chapter 7.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and do not complete your medication and the illness does not have fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the crowns of the head; and with cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with cautery on the nape. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said before.
And it is already cautered above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more difficult; and then it is cured with what proceeds.
Chapter 8.
On the Cauterization of Oblivion Caused by Flux.
It is necessary to give to the patient at the beginning large doses and pills that are wonderfully serving.
And then raise the entire thigh of the patient and place it on the wooden splint described in the treatise on splints.
Place those warm cloths, because that is the manner of cautery. And do it according to the method which I have already described.
And therefore if the patient is sane; and if not, then make three cauteries on the upper part of the head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And place the thick padding of the finger between each cautery, and then take care to make the cautery with what is proceeding.
But if you find the patient is tolerant, then make the cautery in a middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Take care to bring it inside so that it may be healthy; and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
On the cauterization of paralysis and the softening of the entire body.
Because you are proceeding in mondification of the head with gums and with what we have said; and then raise the patient's head, and then cauterize it with cauteries in the middle place of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the upper part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body due to many illnesses and the patients are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make cauteries until it is relieved of the cold humors, and raise the tie that holds it. And take care to bring it inside so that it may be healthy, and let this olive-shaped cautery be.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
And therefore it is necessary to mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and in the other cure, which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gentle gargles and moderate servings of mondifying wine, beforehand for several days, with good purification of the veins.
And raise the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the back of the head, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive-shaped cautery be according to what has been previously stated.
But if the patient is an infant, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said in the paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that purifies his brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And raise the patient's head, and then make a tortoise-shaped decently made device of lead on the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held firmly by all parties.
And then apply a liniment; and it is better to use an old broth of sheep's milk. And heat that over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which is said to be sufficient when it is mixed with it. And then put that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle, and let him be until he is refreshed.
And make the patient take it for a whole week, once a day, as the other regimen of his good health; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to the size of the head, but keep your hand in one cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humidifies the brain with equality.
And then apply that cooked in a broth or in grayish juices of walnut.
Chapter 12.
On the cauterization of descending water in the vein.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the vein through the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and keep him from all humidity.
And it makes that sweating in bath water through various joints.
And then command him to shave the head cap, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if there is beginning of watering in both eyes, or on one side if there is beginning of watering in one eye.
Including the cauteries to all the veins and arteries, which are seen descending from the spine; and place the cauteries in that length along the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, stop with some medicine, which is as much as possible.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized at the neck below two bones with two cauteries, thereby producing a remedy.
Chapter 13.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and assuaged through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of watering in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries at the neck below both temples, and with two cauteries at the neck below both bones. And if you find indication of addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the eye over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cauterization of foul odor of the nose.
When you medicate that with what we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to the patient three nights' worth of medicines; and place a bandage around the head, and cauterize that with a cautery made from a mixture of olive oil and other ingredients. And then cauterize that with a clave-shaped cautery, with two cauteries on both eyebrows below the hair, a little.
And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
And this is the form of the clave-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the cauterization of relaxation of the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed due to weakness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
And if you do, cauterize that over both eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire partition, and thus elongate the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid should be touched.
Chapter 16.
On the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted into inward-growing parts and pierces the eye.
When the skin of the eye is converted into inward-growing parts and thus pierces the eye, cauterize in those cases according to two methods, because the cautery is either with iron or with combustible medicine.
If you cauterize it with a focus, command the patient to stay within that which reads the six skin layers thus as those which are in the world, until they are prolonged and strengthened; and if it pierces that which needs its nourishment, then strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not weakened until the skin is born.
Then when they are born and strengthened, then pause the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the eyes of the patient with a tent, with a signal that is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
And then pause, covered in an album of wool or in a mucilage of powder over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is its form.
And then cauterize over the figure which is signed, little by little, in moistened motifs, until the surface of the spine which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
And the signal of sanity of the entire work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin of it elevated from the punctuation of the eye.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then pause over the entire surface with a border until the scar is eradicated. And then heal that with an ointment until it is healthy.
But if the skin returns to its original cause and the eyelid is relaxed, then make another vein for the cautery over that entire thing, just as you had done primarily.
If the skin is on the eyelid, then it should be elevated to its natural position and be cleansed so that the skin does not touch the wheel.
The cautery in medicine is a burning remedy that commands the patient to lift their skin so that it is prolonged and cleansed, and then make a chart of the fabric of the mirror-like skin.
And then take soap of walnut and cause living water to flow from the wound. And then take soap of walnut and cause living water to flow into the ulcer. Where the water is, and then mix those causes well, and make that an antidote so that it is not frozen; and then spread that over the chart which was made thus in the form of a mirror-like skin, and place that on one wheel of two; and place the wheel with the coto (knot) embedded in album of wool, and the head of the patient be in the position of the tie.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, because bitterness is in it as if from fire.
And thus as you will perceive that the bitterness is gone, then leave the medicine and take it to the same finger; thus as the bitterness ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as if washed from constriction or incision, because then it will be; and if not, return to that of the medicine on the place where you did not apply the medicine and do not deny until your operation is cleansed and the wheel is contracted.
And then place on the knot with the bandage to eradicate the venom of the adjustment, and then cure it with a definite unguent or another so that it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the wheel, and if the eyelid is mollified after some days and any cause of skin touches the wheel, then iterate your medicine on the place where the eyelid is mollified, and properly thus as it was done at the beginning, and then envelop it so that it is healed.
And this is the form of the mirror-like skin.
And you know that the wheels of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what was made your contraction.
And it will not be confused with the way of straightening towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cauterization of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not confuse your cure, then be careful to cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head thus in the position, and hold the head of some minister between the positions more in such a way that it is not moved nor agitated by the head.
And then place a knot embedded in an album of wool or in a mucilage of ptilly over the wheel of it.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which should be conquered, thus as it is a form of cane or of wing of a volturer, from one extremity to the other where the cautery was made.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as you stretch.
However, I command that which is concave is better at the tender work.
And then take the fistula if it is open, and draw out its humor and dry that. And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which was ignited, and you have that in hand a little away from the cautery of the wheel at the bridge of the nose, so that it does not hurt your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the wheel and corrode that.
And thus at the beginning of the wheel cautery, you will perceive into the bone, well; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on that knot with a bandage and envelop it with an unguent exsiccatiu until it is healed.
But if they have passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place on the medicine with an acute corrosive until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
And it is another method of cautery of fistula which the first doctors discovered: then in the place of the fistula and do that and place on that fissure subtly, of which this is the form of it: Put in that a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you have your hand in subtle good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the wheel of it; and take care to place on the wheel of the patient a knot embedded in an album of wool or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous sanitation.
If the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cautery and treatment, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula in its proper place in the body according to how it will return to its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the ulceration of the toes.
Mouth ulcers appearing suddenly in the lips, and worsening in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those ulcers as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is taught:
And it is the conquest of the patient according to the subtlety of his skin.
Then stop that instrument carefully in those ulcers until the cautery penetrates to the root of the ulcers.
And then treat that wound with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
When on the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth, an abscess is formed and then breaks, and it is ruptured, and it is antiquated, and correct breaking and it makes a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then place that ignition in the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand until it penetrates to the iron ignited at the root of it, and afterwards make one or two ulcers; and then treat that wound as we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
And then if the wound is abscessed and healed, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and remove the corrupted bone according to how it will return to its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then stop the head of the patient in the same place, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come to be thus, also so that you stop the handle on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery, holding your hand for a little while, until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth where the ignited cautery has penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to how you wish.
And then the patient should hold his mouth full of salt water for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is toned up and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or there is cold or worm in it, or does not confide in the treatment with medicine, then cautery is applied to that in two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a cauldron of iron, and then take a thread and wrap it around the extremity of the instrument, and then merge it into the boiling horn, and stop it on the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled down.
And then iterate that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the thread or instrument in the aforementioned horn, and stop it on the aching tooth, and stop on that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Moreover, the emperor ordered that cauterization with fire is that you attend to the quantity of iron or iron, and it is in the heart of some gross humor and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that by impression of that cautery the patient should hold his mouth full of good horn and keep it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize with what you wish to extirpate according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula.
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of tumors.
When tumors are of phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this: having two extinguished extremities so that they may receive the fumes from the cautery through the other extremity, and stop the ignited cautery on the abscess one time, and another if it is necessary for that, until it penetrates to the root of the abscess.
If the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and then lift it for three days and place it on the affected area until it is well-cooked in order to consume what the fire has burned.
And then heal that which is wounded and torn, and draw together until it is whole again.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of wounds of the foot and of constrictions of the thigh.
When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by complexity of phlegm, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with medicines that are laxative, and then cauterize that which has deviated from the rule in the predetermined place.
And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery to the rule of the thigh, nor do you burn the code of it except a little.
And cauterize that which is beyond the cautery deviated from the joint of the neck in the back spinal cord of it. And let the cautery of it be shaped according to the previous manner.
And then heal that which is preceded until it is whole again.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
When coughs and diseases of the lung are from cold humors and the patient has no fever nor thirst, and it is an ancient disease, then cauterize that which is with two cauteries on the forked part in the predetermined places, and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be shaped according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pointing out of pain of the ears.
And make points until it reaches those; and then heal that which is preceded until it is whole again.
And now let the cautery have three ramps because the cauterization is in this way: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of gout that is at the head of the help.
When the head of the help is dislocated by reason of lubricating cold humors and it is not fixed at the hour of its usual return, until it is in its usual custom of returning, and then for a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is ended, as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first, and then let the patient be reversed on his back or on his side; and then lift the code which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated below.
And then ignite the cauteries having two heads; and this is their form.
And then cauterize the code until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And some views are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause on the cautery, piercing as in salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a shaped cautery or with three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold comes into the stomach and many cold humors enter to extract its completeness and it is multiplied in it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confuse them, then it is necessary for the patient to be on his back with his arms extended and his thighs, and then cauterize that which is with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest according to the quantity of a finger in a shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the chest, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a purge.
And if the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the two tiers of the thickness of the code.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized pointedly at that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with tension, and then cauterize that which is with a pointed cautery; and then heal that which is with the cure that precedes until it is whole again.
Chapter 27.
About the cauterization of the feverish foot.
When the foot is painful due to coldness or humidity or excessive wind entering, which disrupts its normal complex structure and causes superfluous egress, and it is cured by the method we have described and not by comforting, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and three cauterizations are applied in this form and quantity, measuring them above the foot just below the hips, so that the decubitus of the man is perceived.
And let the space be between each cautery according to the thickness of the digit, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend with your hand when applying the cautery movement.
And if the quantity of water that has been absorbed is equal to the quantity of the majesty of the specific codeina, and it does not need further adjustment; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and raised their legs.
And it is possible that you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and let the specific codeina of the whole body be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the entire body and penetrates into the intestines, because the codeina here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
About the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel heavy and grave pain, and their suffering will be acute.
And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and often the doctors are exhausted from treating it.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back; and place a sign on the area of the abscess with a probe; and place a ignited cautery, which is assembled like a rag, in the form that was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire codeina is combined, until it penetrates to the ciphalic, until it reaches the sana.
And then treat that for the cure of other abscesses until it is healthy.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine has prolonged it, and in many of which most maladies are known; more, I have experimented with some vague things being said about this operation, but I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
About the cauterization of wounds.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology wounded in this manner, being made by those who took from the roots of Aristology a long and dry root that is found, and it is of the thickness of the digit.
And then submerge it in oil and expose it to fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place where the furcula meets the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and a cautery at that place where it is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary that you comprehend with your hand on the cauteries, but rather it should be in the manifestation of the codeina in operation.
And thus I have described the ancient cauteries that are similar to those of men who use iron-like cauteries resembling a ray and igniting them, and placing them in that place which is between the ribs, until they penetrate to that abscess and healthy sania is restored, just as we have said in the case of the abscess on the foot.
More, in this perforation with cauteries, there is no fear, because I have seen that it often happens that the cautery accidently falls on the fistulous place where it does not heal.
Chapter 30.
About the cauterization of the hernia.
When you treat the malady of the hernia with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not contradict your cure, then cauteries are applied in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four lines according to the length of the hernia, according to the figure of the cauteries on the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And if you are between any cautery the greatness of a finger or a few months, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have described in the cautery of the foot's gout.
And do not comprehend your hand in the cautery; and the patient is to be elevated on two pillows.
And there is another way of cauterying, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two virtues, which causes have been described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and elevates the cord which is at the end of the thigh where the patient feels the pain on the left side.
And it is your elevation that you elevate the cord according to the length of the body, so that you make points with cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two virtues, ignite motion, in that entry where those penetrate the cord of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus you make four points with cauteries.
And if you wish, cautery with a cautery having three virtues.
And then you cure the cautery, so that it has been freed from getting broken for three years, because many are more confident that the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter 21.
On the Cautery of Dropsy.
Cauteries are not made in dropsy, but rather in a circular manner properly.
When you cure the dropsical patient with the manners of cure which have been described in the division and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circle of the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the thigh, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right of the chest, and one cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the cord.
And then leave the cautery open so that it gets broken for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure then with the cautery, which is necessary for that to be added to the two intentions, and will be fixed to the healthy assistant.
The shape of the cautery which is cauterized on the belly is club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that which is cauterized on the back which is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter 32.
On the Cautery of Feet and of the Hips.
When the feet are apostematized in dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it all, because the watery humor is reduced.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make points on both hips with two cauteries, and in each hip a cautery is made at the extremity of the cutting cautery. And it is the cautery according to the length of the hip: one on the outer side and another on the middle place of the hip; and on each hip two cauteries.
And then leave the open plague for a long time cure so that some watery humor is reduced from it.
And then cure the patient with those causes which have been described.
Chapter 33.
On the Cautery of the Belly and of the Stomach.
When the belly is cold and humid inside so that it debilitates the virtues, then it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured with those manners of cure and do not contradict, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting cauteries of virtue, then cautery that with a great cautery on the entire stomach according to what precedes in the cautery of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the subtle circle of the navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and with a cautery on the upper part above the large waist, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidity exhibits and the patient tolerates it, then cautery that on the epigastric region and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, because it is a perfect cure of youthful vigor which does not err.
Chapter 34.
On the Cautery of Old Hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors cold and corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and does not contradict their tieue cure, then cautery them with three cauteries on the small triangular spot below the spine of the back, and with a cautery above the navel for two digits.
If it is supposed that the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food is not being digested, and their face is often pale, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cautery; and place one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the patient's back, with a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and afterwards take care to heal the interior.
Chapter 35.
On cauterization of the thigh, afterwards remove them (the cauteries).
When you remove the thigh, then you should ignite the cautery that is assembled into a rod. Afterwards insert the ignited rod into that removed thigh, and ultimately stop the flow so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make an incision or two, because if the thighs are too thin, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and afterwards take care of those who are afflicted with gout so that they may be healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in youth.
Chapter 36.
On cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the patient's nature, divided into their parts.
When the patient's nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Therefore when someone has a fistula in their nature behind, and it is ancient, corroding the healthy part of them and corrupting the humidity, and therefore that which is more worthy than covering is that one proceeds with a subtle probe, and afterwards conveys the quantity of the profundity of them before the aforementioned probe.
Afterwards ignite the cautery that resembles a rod. And afterwards insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it intersects with the probe.
And hold the cautery over that fistula until the corrupt bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And afterwards take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the bad matters, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it has been entirely cured.
And if the bad matters are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the corrupted bone, or it falls into those causes which will be remembered in its place.
Chapter 37.
On cauterization of the veins.
When in the veins there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the joint of the patient's thigh is weakened, then it is fitting that you cauterize that over the veins with a cautery on each vein with a claw-shaped cautery, from which proceeds the remembrance.
And strongly cauterize them according to the small design, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more beneficial in youth.
Chapter 38.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine is not retained, then cauterize that in the most tender part above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of nodes on the skin; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And it is a claw-shaped cautery according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On cauterization of the matrix (or womb).
When there is cold and humidity in the matrix (or womb), and thus conception is prohibited, and its menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there is pain from the retention of them, then it is fitting that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical region, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery on the lowest part of the back, or two cauteries, and it is a claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter 40.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When humidity gathers and infiltrates into the part of the ankle, and thus false causes of the settling of that place are made, and it is signified that the fracture is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is detected in the boy's hips.
Then you should cauterialize the patient on the affected area of their ankle with a circular cautery, since you have sensed it in the circuit of the affected area like that which is revolved, and so that the affected area returns to its proper place in the circle.
And it is the cautery of which I previously described the method in the cauterialization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterialize that with three cauteries in the olive-shaped great cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then cure it from within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterialization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle area, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that which is ancient, then you should release the patient from gross humors with foul pills or artificial ones similar to them; and then cauterialize it.
And the method of cautery in that is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific methods, one of which is that it cauterially treats the ankle area with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form; and do so at a good depth. And it is the space which is between each cautery, according to the quantity of the greatness of the finger and if the olive-shaped or great cautery.
Sometimes it is necessary to place the cautery in the proper position on the head of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterialize with the circle in which the method was previously described in the cauterialization of the ankle's dislocation, where the circle contains and combusts the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the method of cautery in certain cases when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Sometimes if it extends into the thigh, then cauterialize with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is, and with one cautery on the knee joint for four fingers' width below the affected part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient complains that the pain is extended to the area close to the toes, then cauterialize it here where it complains with a cautery of three points or four or maybe even more if it is deserved.
And if the patient complains of pain beneath the knee towards the thigh, then cautenticate it here with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterialization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that you burn nerves or major arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nourishment or contraction.
And I have already seen one or another of those who cauterially treated the knee joint and ultimately ended up with a cauterialization that caused inflammation inside until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong abscess occurred in the belly, and then that led to death.
And if the pain is in two areas at once, cauterialize each one according to this method.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterialization of the ankle, which is this method: make it similar to a circle of iron, from which the circuit is the size of a palm; and let it be with seven orifices according to the greatness of a finger's bone or a little less.
And let that circle be another inch; and let the space between them be according to the quantity of the notch of the thumb; and these circles are used for two areas; and let their length be one or two notches, and make a decently decorated iron edge in those circles; and this is their form.
Then it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then it is placed on the ankle area, the patient sitting on a sheet with their legs bent. And then cauterialize it with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a poultice with bandages and leave the open wound for many days; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasis says: Oh, sons, I have used this type of cautery little for the fear of the regard of God, and for this reason I have found few who regard it above all.
Sometimes some good cauteries are sufficient for him who suffers, and they find them in the place of God.
Sometimes cauteries with adhering medicines are those that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which they insert the hinge of the iron door; let the length of the partition be in the nakedness of them, about two inches or quadruples.
And if you leave the space that exists between each quantity of the thickness of the finger; and it is opened below and above, and it is contained between them according to this form.
And then place a pause on the partition of the water, the patient sitting on the side, and compress your hand on the partition of the water; and take hot water in a circle and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be warm to the small fire, and hold that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderate and adjusting of it  because that atrocious moderation is also as from fire  until the moderation ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water in double water.
And then leave that for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave that for some days, and correct its purification; this is the last stage in juvenation.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make a statue of it in what contains water according to what is done in the ankle joint.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of two names in one partition, and stir them and pause in a new vessel of which the partition below should be perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
And pause below the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and cause living water which takes those for one finger, and since you comprehend those with your tie for good compression, and leave the hole that descends from the water to the partition below to the other vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkaline renovators, because at that time it will be very strong acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized by fire, also as you do with teas and honey and cause a savory in that way so they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which is cured pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed by a visit, also as he recommends, because strong will be his spirit in banishing and escaping from that.
And it is that it should be pressed with certain green herbs, and if it is not found to be green, take fresh figs; and much should be stirred in a few gray things and paused on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it should be released.
And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put that in banishment and thus when the body of it is disenchanted, entrust that to the soil, because the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that it does not cover that some use of cautery in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Moreover, I, Escorides, say that when the vein of the goat's foot is cauterized, it benefits; and it is the cautery in the following manner: take a woollen cloth and soak it in old oil, and pause it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take a dry goat's foot and inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized; and then pause it on the woollen cloth and leave it until it is stretched. And then iterate that, and do not cease doing that until the sentiment of the moderation penetrates into the water and repauses the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cautery of cow's horns.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain in the Toes.
Some painful toes are in the toes for many causes, such as through injury or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not useful except in this sole species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore it is necessary, then evacuate the patient with prepared pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, since you have a tent in each line or cautery, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And it should be done with punctual cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial clave cautery according to this form.
Chapter 43.
About cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Motions are avoided in this illness in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble upon their own structure, lacking elevation and movement.
And the vertebrae in the back of the spine begin to overgrow on top of the others.
And then when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this form: that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circular motion.
And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery of two lines or three. And then make points properly between them.
And then heal the area within so that it becomes healthy again with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
About cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout of cold cause is cured in a manual way of treatment and the pains are not alleviated, then they remain, and thus cautery remains.
And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains move into the teeth or to other joints, and this many times is repeated, then cauterize that on each tooth with three cauteries or four of the entire part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, it is only necessary to surround the affected area of the codena.
And if the pains move into the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point around the circle of the ankles thus as it revolves, point on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circle of the ankles on each notch and on the tip of the hand.
And if the pains move to the nearby joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire joint.
And do not evacuate the illness with good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the weakness is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Chapter 45.
About cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the veins and the intestine comes out of its cavity, and this begins to come out, then it is necessary that you order the patient to stay in his commode for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound will heal on the seventh day.
And then follow the patient between your hands on the seventh day, and command him to hold his seven wings inside so that it will be fortified or the intestine or hernia will not come out.
And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew it in order to hold the rupture on the bone of the pentagonal shape, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the circle at the subtler parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form:
until it becomes very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery standing upright, and then on that until you have consecrated the bone of the pentagonal shape into the middle of the divine; and afterwards on that other occasion if you have not achieved it in the first occasion until the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient there will come no death or other great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bone, it does not confer your operation.
It is necessary that the cautery of the children be subtle according to their age and measure.
And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with gentle entry so that the crust of the wound is removed.
And then treat those who have other wounds until they are healed.
The patient should sit on a soft cushion for forty days until the area and plague are sealed.
It is necessary to pause the nourishment of it according to the length of time of its cure, which empties the belly of it, and that the intestine does not come out during the effort of healing.
And then when one wants to get up after forty days, then administer gentle and decent food, and hold that for another forty days.
And it is warned about exertion and replenishment of food and drink, and violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will be entirely healthy.
And I will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you should not delay, then cauterize the rupture of that which is being cauterized repeatedly according to its quantity, and it is what is expelled from the intestine thus like the third part of it; and then treat that which has been said, and do not adjust.
And I will show some first cases where the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked on the tent.
and it is a paused line that goes through the width in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and I place my hand on a key-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Chapter 46.
On the Cauterization of Hernia.
When pain occurs in some members due to a fall or percussion and persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of hernia and pain of it.
So if it is not healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then iterate over it with the cautery; because of the custom of those pains it is that they are punctured in a member next to that member which approaches the one, so that it is necessary to continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some leprous wounds are treated with a cautery for great joy, and magnificently if the type of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And thus as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends all of their body and all its complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and at the forehead to the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And finally place your hand on the cautery a little while into the bone to make a small impression, and from it the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the marrow according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each hip, and one on each thigh, and two on each knee, and one on each shin, and two on each ankle, and two on each muscle, and two on the tendons of the foot; and cauterize that on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the soles of their hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the ankle that you do not touch those.
And some wounds are treated with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more joyful and confident it is; and you know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus like they have said, because the body of it is already stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints as it is preceded by the species of the instruments.
And you should burn the cautery iron in fine powder of iris root, mixing it with honey and another treatment inside so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the cauterization of numbness.
When some member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healthy, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter into the narrowness of the channel of the spine a little. And you should take care to insert it gently so that it may be healthy.
And sometimes veins are cauterized for some numbness which goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and it is felt in the movement of the nerves which govern that member, and the numbness is relieved.
But do not press on it except for what is known from the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves to the moving whole body.
Chapter 49.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are gangrene.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to the usual remedies of medicine, then you cauterize on that place with a pointed cautery a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the spine until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
And you should take care to make powder from roots and lentils with rose oil and leaves of dragon plant, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, each one being a part and all are mixed together, and then anoint a bandage and place it on the area until it is healthy.
Chapter 50.
On the cauterization of cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that place with a circular cautery in the circumference of it, just as it is turned around.
And I will teach you that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it has not been seen, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and yet I have seen some veins.
And it is better to cauterize in the circumference of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On the cauterization of indurations.
When some induration is delayed in maturity, and it is because of the superfluous fat that makes it, or because of the state of the patient, since it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten its maturity; then cauterize around it with many small pointed cauteries; and you should leave it so that it may be hastened in maturity.
But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you should ignite the cautery of which this is the shape; and place it in the middle of the induration until it penetrates the spine.
And if you make the cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and you should take care of it until it is healthy.
Chapter 52.
On the cauterization of corroding ulcers.
Corroding ulcer is a corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that place just as fire consumes dry wood.
Then if you want to cauterize that corroding ulcer in the place where it suffers from fire, then you should ignite cauteries with many small nails, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corroding.
And you should cauterize the whole part until you eradicate all corrosion and none of its causes remain.
And you should leave it for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a triple layer of oil mixed with scar tissue until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
And you should take care to make powder from flesh-bearing roots.
But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted in the corrupted places.
And corroding ulcer is treated with some old remedies of acute medicine, because that is half in place of cautery. But Emperor's cautery with fire is to add less juice of juniper.
And I have said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, and so take that when it is in its proper season.
Chapter 53.
On the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Many veins go to the lower parts of the foot afflicted with a wound called "clau", and it is a gross, festering cause which harms the foot; and cauteries are made in those places according to two manners, so it is cauterized with fire and cauterized with hot water.
More cauteries are made at the point where it seems to ignite with a burning pain, which is made of iron according to the quantity that each part contains, and is of subtle margins.
And then stop the ignition on the nail, and return your hand to the cautery in the circuit of the nail until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail. And leave it like that for three days until you start to feel better gradually. And then apply a poultice made with evil-smelling herbs and salt, and leave the poultice on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place affected by generating new flesh until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and you have wounds opening on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer those cauteries with water, and it is that you take a cannula of iron or of burning pain, and stop that on the nail; and then pour a little quantity of hot water, and return your hand, and you return that with compression of your hand from top to bottom, and it is implanted in the margin of the cannula at the root of the nail, and you will find the hot water flowing through the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while feeling the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus it is done in those places and then you proceed to the other until you overcome all the parts of their body.
And then heal those pus that the roots of the nails are eradicated, and with which the flesh will regenerate.
Chapter 3.
On the cautery of trembling.
When you have a trembling due to cold in the nerves or because of a fever caused by cold, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you apply cauteries with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and apply a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, a cautery on the olive-shaped part.
And the trembling of it is relieved and the health of the patient is restored from the cold disease.
Chapter 4.
On the cautery of sudden accidents to the body.
When the body is suddenly afflicted, and pustules appear which are made of gross corrupted matter; therefore it is necessary at the beginning to appear, that it be cautered on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended in fire; or with a root of long erestology; or with a slow cautery.
And ulcers are cautered at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not swollen, and it is dispersed, the superfluous flesh making those, and healthy from those.
More often it is necessary that this be done with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 6.
On the cautery of fluxes of blood accidentally spilled by incision of an artery.
Ulcers often have fluxes of blood from an artery that is injured by the wound which it has in front, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and then it seems difficult to stop that.
Therefore when it reaches that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop above that the tie which is tied to strengthen those ulcers until the flux of blood stops, and does not flow out.
And then stop in the fire the olive-shaped cauteries few and large, by name of many, and suffocate above those until they are not ignited.
And then take from those a small one or a large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, above that vein firmly holding it so that you will have restrained the tie, and you will have cauterized until the blood is abolished and restrained.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you restrain the tie and extract the cauteries, then take another cautery carefully among the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restrained.
And beware that you do not harm the nerves that are here, and that another evil does not come over the patient.
And you know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: or with a cautery as I have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a faithful ligature, or that it be stopped by medicines which have the virtue of restraining the blood; and they are strengthened in a pulvine constriction.
One who administers restrictions decently to the limb and restricts its structure and its wraps or for the position of burning causes and similarities, not comforting but rather tart.
Perhaps if one is not at the doctor's presence or medicine, then make a pause on the indicated finger over the orifice of that vein, as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood is stopped from the superior part of the plague, and about the artery it does not seem to be diminished; and about the artery it seems to be very constricted with great constriction so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps it is necessary to cauterize or medically treat what has been touched.
Of incision and perforation and of vein operations and of flea-botany and of wounds and of their similarities.
I have already said in the first chapter that all malady in which cautery is convenient and medical burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I have ordered the chapters according to the subordinate state of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that methodology, so that it may be clarified to the one who seeks it, then about that which will have been demanded.
And therefore I begin here, certainly, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that which certainly is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, such as evacuation of blood from the vein or incision over the abscess or perception of exosture or purification of the wound or extraction of arrowhead or beginning of rock and their similarities. And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their deeds death.
And I warn you that about you none of this falls in which there is sitting, because some evacuations happen from your own hands as men with many kinds of maladies. And of them it is said that they flee from their malady and fear death, and thus for the vehemence of that which finds its malady, and for the length of the malady of it, and in the malady is the fear which signifies death.
And of those it is the one that gives to your son to have and said, you hoping for that health, and the following malady is pernicious.
And therefore you do not consent to that which comes to you from this kind of thing; and your caution should be greater than what is written, and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about it unless with certain scientific knowledge which verifies it from you, and in which you perceive laudable success.
And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies with prognosis and indication of it, which is converted health, because in that you are helped above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and not abandon your direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinct from chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be clarified to you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
You know that this malady has many evacuations, until the infants are freed from infancy and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant with its liveliness.
And some evacuations happen because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Perhaps you have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom you have seen are touched by death, and thus it is to me shown a pitiful work in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of it was always thus magnified until it could not hold itself upright because of the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until mortal faintness.
And this humidity or is added between the codena and the bone, or is added below the bone on the siphac.
Because the operation in that case the humidity is between the codena and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is fitting that you make on the middle part of the head a fissure in latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is greater, then there are two fissures here according to this method.
And if the humidity is below the bone, it seems that you close the commissures of the head obstructed from all parts and the water is pressed out when you compress it in the same manner at the internal partitions and it is not hidden from you. Look where you find yourself in the middle of the head's location with three fissures according to this manner.
And then extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and poultices; and then apply something over it for six days, and then dissolve the liament and cure the plague in tenderness and swelling, and strengthen the head equally; and feed the patient on a dry diet of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And it is another manner of incision, which considers how to expose the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated are more in the occipicii, or on the front side, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the repetition of the water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those flowings of blood and harm the patient through that flux of blood in evacuation of moisture.
Chapter following.
When there are many catarrhs or rheumas in the veins or at the feet, and it is an old thing, and it does not correspond to the cure of medicines, then the last cure is in this incision of those two arteries.
And then look when you want to incise those that the patient's reason loses his head, and apply a dry drap on the location with an asperous cloth so that the arteries appear, and apply strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of whoever is above the places which are near the auricles, and they occultate themselves in some homes.
And apply a sign on the artery in tension, and apply incisions whoever is in the spatium of whoever part above in an incision pervading into the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, enter the spatium below the artery and cut it to equalize the incisions at the upper parts.
And it is the length of the incision which measures two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised the blood is ejected in a pulsating emission, which jumps frequently before jumping back.
More if the artery does not appear at the incision, then look where you measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and apply a sign in tension, and do so into the bone.
And it is that then you extract from the blood the quantity of six ounces. and you should not extract more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and from the repetition of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the ciphac, then incise it so that no abscess forms cautiously.
And then strengthen the plague with poultices and liaments of cloth from it, and then cure it in swelling until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there are some ancient immigrations or catarrhs, due to humidity and quality in the lactifers of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not correspond, then we have spoken about these maladies extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's reason loses the skin which are in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the seven pulses, and it is occultated only in few homes due to vehemence of fever.
And if it is occultated, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and apply a dry drap on the location or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatium of which this is the form: And then you score the codeina in that which is facilitated until you penetrate to the artery; and then take it out of the vein and extract it from the upper parts until you extract it from the codeina and discover it from the tunics which are below, from all the part.
More if the artery is subtle, then envelop it in the extremity of the vein, and incise it from one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and do not find a flux of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
And then evacuate six ounces of blood. Between three.
And if the artery is large, then you will find that it lies in two places with double strong cords or long strings, and do not touch the putrid flesh during the consolidation of the plague and endeavour to stop the flow of blood.
Then incise the excess flesh which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cutting cautery until the extremities of it are incised, and stand in place of that bad mixture.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of complicated complexion; because cautery is for those causes that help to end the humidities, and therefore it is better in youth.
And you will have the extraction of the arteries that fill the place of cutaneous anthrac, and they are placed decently on the soft pulvils, and you will be cured by secret medicines that make the flesh and bones whole again so that it is healthy.
And if meanwhile you work on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the artery, then you touch it to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of cutaneous, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place until the blood is congealed, and envelop the place with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain ceases, and it will be strengthened according to what is desired.
And that which is more suitable in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cutting edges, since you have touched the two places with tension, and pause sometimes, not much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the sharpness of the two cutting edges together. However, the Emperor says that if you sharpen the sharpness of two cutting edges better, it is more suitable, because if you have them sharp as two cutting edges proper to each wound, and do not cut the flesh with velocity.
So when there is some roughness in those, it is held by the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is more easily abscessed.
And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
And it is the space which is between two cutting edges the quantity of the roughness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors of the wells.
When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not contribute to any cause of medicinal cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels in the dry front of walking thus as if it were a walk of ants, and the wells of that one are exhausted, humidifying thus that already their skin is worn out, and the eyebrows are scalped by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient masters mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and no one remembers that cure in space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the skin which is on the dry front, and then incise in the front three deep fissures equally distant according to the length of the front. And if the length of the fissure falls in two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
And if you have a piece of sponge-like material or dry fabrics that absorb much blood from the veins.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it: which is from the division of the temples until the second incision. Extract all that code which is between two incisions on the siphac which is above the bone, and then make it from the middle incision until the second incision. And then insert this spatula and enter into the first incision another instrument called a cutellar, having one part sharp and the other not sharp.
And pause the layer of that sharp part towards the adjacent flesh next to the code, and the layer of it penetrates into the bone, and fill it until it reaches the middle fissure, and abscesses all those veins that descend from the head to the wells.
It seems that the patient's inflammation should be continued towards the water appearance of the knee, and then make it enter the left fissure into another fissure.
Then because of the flow of a large quantity of blood, express the places of the bloody congested passages.
And then stop at some warm water fissure of the entire body, and stop over those swollen veins that are surrounded by fire and oil, and watch that no aposteme is cauterized.
And on the third day, remove the ligature and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure it with basilicon oil mixed with rose oil and others, until the wounds are fully healed.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending humors from the internal divisions of the head.
When the catarrh comes with continuous thick mucus, and sometimes the humors of the patient are extended and thin, and already their eyesight is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated and because of this, their skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent extension, then one knows that due to this accident, the matters and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the internal divisions proceeding.
And the best cure for these is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a fissure at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the latitude (and begin with the fissure of the left temple towards the right temple; and make an incision into the bone; and extend your hand through the lacertes of the temples which are numb from mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with warm water or cloths. And then strengthen underneath with swollen veins surrounded by fire and oil, so that no aposteme is cauterized.
And when you remove the water and see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it begins to form new flesh, and then cure it with a regimen of dry poultices which make the flesh heal, thus if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colofania, mix them together, and make an emplaster and administer it in these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the cure of those that fall into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus like iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus like cez or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus like water and fire, and its semblance, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause of those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if it is peyra, then distill it with some violet oil or sizami, and administer the extraction of it, and make a purge with conditions, and open the nostrils for the coming of purging. And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer an extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gestures, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of silver and insert the extremity of the canal into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil, softened so that nothing is opened except the canal. And then extract it with the strong ventilation, because many evacuated matters come out with water that we have recounted.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared vessels with which the wings of a small quantity are pressed, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently paused. And then insert that into the tract of the ear facilitated, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch so that there is no aposteme cauterized or spasm.
And the manner of touching that is that you at the beginning cleanse the patient's vein sepifica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a cesura between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear from which the grey matter of it is in the place previously mentioned. If the lunar figure's fissure is turned towards the stone, and the stone is worn out, then you can apply an appropriate instrument; and apply it to the fissure at that hour with velocity, and heal it so that it is healthy.
And if the cause resides in the ear and is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your assent, then take subtle spatula tuned according to this form: and administer to that the abscess of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And do not make that when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapors of the ear, and place it in many small masses, and try to extract them with small gestures or subtle touches, or as if making an incision, because it is alleviated by the extraction of it.
But if the water that has entered the ear covers the patient who uses sternutation to calm down, and fills the entire ear with a lot of noise, and pours over that ear in which there is the water, and if it is forgotten, be it; and otherwise, then take three or four small stones according to the length of the finger, and place them in the focus of one part, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of their ear and sounds over one part of that side and percusses with another stone on the stone that touches the ear. Then stop pouring water into the ear until all the water is forgotten.
Then stop pouring water into the ear until all the water is forgotten. And now the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the focus until it is burned by the bad humor of it.
And also place another cotton and make as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw it out with a cannula, just as it is said of the extra-ordinary stone ear.
But in the extraction of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pull and to its semblance, cure it thus as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and incisions, and the cause of it is less grievous than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then beware lest you expose the ear to the sun.
And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle incisions, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and wide, from which this is the form of it: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and apply suction with water for strong sucking, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your assent, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and find it in the treatise on distillations.
And this is your effusion which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form of it: And make that of silver or of copper, straight, in which there is a small hole, and with a flat surface.
And so it will be as they are used to be in the cavity of the cannula container here, which will be necessary. And if you want, take the radish and envelop it decently in the extremity of it, and apply juice of oil in the cavity of the instrument, or sap of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula  and that is in the ear , and then insert the radish with a gentle touch and express your hand on it with tempered compression until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And what is poured into the ear is already scaled in focus a little. And beware that the cause you distilled into the ear is not too frequent, for the ear medicines do not endure that.
Chapter 7.
On the cure of obstruction of ears.
Some turns some infants have not-perforated vents of their mothers' wombs, and that already happens in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to plague or carnation in that; and this obstruction some turns is made in the press of the ear's trajectory which does not constrict movement, and some turns are in the parts before.
And that which accumulates in the chest of theirs, which does not comprehend the vein's movement, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that which follows the vein's movement, you should pause at the patient's ear on the sole and look at that. And then if obvious swelling appears, observe carefully the subtle space of which this is the shape of it:
If the extremity of it is in which there is little latitude, where one part is acute and the other not; and the space is of two equal sides so that it does not touch the ear.
And then if the swelling is from born flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should cut subtly and make an incision there, vigorously facilitating entrance so that all the flesh is opened.
And if the swelling is in the chest of the ear, then take a subtle razor and clear that focus on a few, and then put it in the meat of the ear.
And then if you feel the swelling in the water that the patient's turbidity has facilitated, due to the gravity of the hearing, it forces the oppression of it facilitated; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then pause in the ear, dripping with oil according to the quantity of the width of the channel which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a saucepan, boiling and powdering over the third trituration and using it; and if the ear has already been apostemed, then you should extract the water and permute it with another water which you will involve in wax that is well-roasted, until it is the aposteme cauterized; and then cure it until it is healed.
Maybe if there is a flow of blood, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and pause over the ear, and use another cure that restrains the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the cure of athelia, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athelia which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, some veils are humid, some veils are dry.
Then you should hold those with tenacious or on the nail, and cut those that are spaced from their roots, and then pause over the places third-triturated.
Maybe if pain with blood flow comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle, lance-shaped cautery.
And the best cauterization is to burn the incisions and dry veils returning when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Veils that are born in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled to cataract in its strength and hardness, and thus cataract is called.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Then the operation on them is that you should consider then if the cataract is proceeding in it, as it appears from the eyelid and is moved to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make a notch above it with a width, and then clear it from the entire part facilitated until it is evacuated, and then suspend it in the nail and absolve it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the angel of it restores and incarnates.
And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the deep surface, then you lift the eyelid and suspend the cataract in the nail, unless you indicate an incision, and press it throughout the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that does not harm in any cause.
And then make the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and cure the place with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the cure of axcirnah in the eyelid below the eye.
Axcirnath is a grayness which is engendered in the tunics of the eyelid below, and mostly it appears in children, aggravating the eyes of those and causing their catarrh to flow; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sun due to the grief that converges on them.
And thus you often see them casting shadows over their faces all the time, and over their faces sleeping; and so on the eyelids of their below the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent convergence is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel convergence until it is apparent.
Here is the translation:
Perhaps in the preceding cavity you find the entire code within which you reach to accumulate, because in the major deposits processes accumulate through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Then extract that humour which you have enveloped between the fingers of both hands on the affected parts before and revolve it between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust on the fissure so that the fluid does not penetrate to the vein and descends from there.
Maybe if it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, maybe that you adjust on the fissure a small facilitated humour until it accumulates; and then extract that thus as we have said; and then submerge the cloths in water and wine, and place them over the area and strengthen those humours with poultices.
And thus you will draw out salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
And then heal it until it is healthy.
Maybe if there are abscesses in the affected place, then cure that with emplasters of cedar until it is healthy.
Chapter 11.
On methods of touching the vein.
When in the veins of the eyes there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those that annoy the vein and cause maladies such as assiduous tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until it is the cause of destruction of the vein which is called touching of the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with canes as you will be directed.
And then it is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your right hand, and if it is converted, well; and otherwise, insert a needle in that part where there is faith of the affected area beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from below, and it will be  near the edge of the eyelid where the veins are  near the veins, and pull the faith to the upper parts beneath the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
And then feel in the affected area beneath the eyelid where the adjusted veins are with incidental fluid of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the faith and place it beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then seal over the eyelid with a tent, and it will be thus like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Maybe it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because then it is diversified in the homes, because of those it is what is indicated that a great quantity should be incident on the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then feel with the fluid on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural veins thus as it is the grossness of the king.
And then place the onion on one of the two angles of the code, and then excavate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle scythe the two labia at the gula or faith of wool, and abstergize the blood, and make adhere what superfluously flows from the faiths over the two eyebrows for some envisioning causes, if you want to do it, and otherwise, do not cure.
And then loosen the suture of the faiths for three days or four, and then cure it.
And if you want, loosen the plague's suture, and cure it with that which dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sigillation of the plague and its aggregation; maybe the suture is better. Therefore, I have thus distinguished the ancient taxes of taxanir.
Maybe it is necessary to solicit about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid figure thus as myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and congregated inches according to this form:
Maybe if it is not possible to have the inches, and that is not engulfed, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other faith near the major lacrimal, and the faith according to the minor lacrimal, and adjust between the fingers of both hands the faiths in equality, and then elevate your hand with elevation engulfed, elevate the entire code over which it is marked thus as we have recommended.
And you adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and heal that inner part so it is healthy.
Perhaps you should incise the abscess or your fissure, but that abscess is near the skin and it seems to be encased.
And some evacuated wounds on the eyelid that are converted into scars, then cover what you have used in that wound that we have spoken of incision; perhaps suture in some cases is more artificial.
To treat with cannons according to this method: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is deduced according to what has been recounted; and then by art make two cannons or two subtle asters of which length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their being less than the width of the spatium. And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add certain subtleties underneath what superfluously hangs from the eyelid of the eye, and construct the cannons of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and place them there for some days, because the code for the morbid structure will be negated and it will be repelled until it is seen that it will fall into place.
Perhaps it is delayed, then cut the torn places, and then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Since it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not sting.
And this is the method of making two cannons which you will make according to this form: and it has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
About the elevation of stinging skin on the eye with a pointed instrument when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the eyes, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle pointed instrument and place it in that thin vein of subtle flesh and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move in a very subtle manner. And it is the length of the veins of the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle vein below it in brief, and numb the extremities of that if you want.
And then stop the evil at its head in the tendon, and it is proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenium, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract that from under the natural skin.
And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into alignment, and the skins will be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand into that until the skin is separated from alignment with the eyelid and the natural skin.
Perhaps it is aligned and the skin is not grafted, you will align to the parts below with the vein which you have composed in that, until it is grafted into alignment of the above-mentioned passage.
And you see that in the vision of the eye, because then you will graft into alignment and the vein, and you will close certain things and bind the eye, and leave the binding for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its proper place and is born over good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or that which remains until it is lengthened properly to some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of hemorrhage which occurs in the eyelid underneath.
When there is hemorrhage in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted in its own, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or of sections or of cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this hemorrhage is natural or accidental, and it is made for consolidation of wounds or of sections or of cauterization, or for resemblance to their malformation.
There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it at what is between them a certain measure of drap of linen, and tie them together until they are healthy.
And do not think that you use the cure of it for the causes which dry up, constriction; because if you make that return to hemorrhage worse than nothing at any time.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as it is fenugrec, and imbue with water in which they are cooked alta and senseless of linen, or inject diaquilon, which liquefies in some of the oils, and submerge in that measure, and cure in that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perfect in every engine that is not consolidated according to the form that was begun at the beginning.
And in this operation which we have described, it is not just some correction of the alignment that does not return the shape of the place according to what was previously determined.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of hernia which is made in the eyelid below.
This hernia which is made in the eyelid below, which is naturally called hernia; and it is of two kinds, natural and accidental.
The accidental one is made by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spatulum of ample size. And then if it returns to the shape of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two fissures in the lattice of the lower eyelid.
And the extremities of the two fissures form two angles of the incision, which are made so that they converge, and be from their made angle so that when they gather, it forms the figure of theirs.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh there for the quantity that is the lattice of the lower eyelid, which is sufficient to close the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and then take care of them with what we have said about soothing medicines and poultices, so that it may be healthy.
And if the hernia is opened by a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure above the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously said. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of hernia whether it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of hernia, and that is in the form of various diverse knots.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in such a way that it is possible to return the shape to its natural form, or close to it, and that hernia according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidly attached above on the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it, or stretch it towards the nail.
And then you make the adhesion with a subtle spatulum, which is not sharp enough to cause incisions, having obtained an obtuse angle so that the hernia is not disturbed by the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not harm the eye in its sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it excavates that adhesion with facility, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and that the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put salty water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and pause on the eye a woolen cloth infused with white of egg, and then use it for three days as a cause of consolidative treatments so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 16.
On the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh from the tear ducts.
You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and similar to a subtle dry cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, similar to a whitish humid congestion, which when touched, or is forced to take in the nail, is absorbed and the nail does not fix itself in it.
And both species do not come from the major tear duct unless they go little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
The manner of operating in the incision of it is that the hernia pauses the six fingers in the tie, and then operates on its eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the nail from the little duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above. And then take a needle and introduce it into a hair of horse or ox or of a bird, or of similar things, or of strong faith, or duplicate the extremity of the little needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with faith the nail; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excavate the hair from the lattice of the nail which closes the pupil. And thus you will follow that bone from the spine into its rear.
And thus you will insert the rhinental into the lacrimal duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and remove the natural flesh of the lacrimal to prevent any continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail of the sole is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it must be excavated with a lion-shaped spatula, from which this is the form of it.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the spatula and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then insert the gutta into the wound a little salt water or dew of cypress, and let it enter another day; and then take care that this water covers inside so that it may be sanctified.
And if the nail is not nervously sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that sole, then many times this type of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus as I have written and recommended in the division.
And if you want to cut into that, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion-shaped spatula with an acute edge according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarified and confused and enters into that root, then distill from your work in the wound with dew of cypress or dew of rose or salt water, and apply the wound another day.
And then iterate over that operation until all that is of it is removed, but on the contrary be cautious lest an abscess forms in the wound, because then you will leave that, and take care at the beginning to form the abscess so that it may be healed.
And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the wound for great nuisance, should be suspended with an onion; and insert that from that one part, and do not finish the insertion so that it does not insert a flow of tears.
And then distill into the lacrimal dew of rose and dew of cypress until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
About the insertion of almond-like and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Some wounds on the eyes of some people are born with red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to close over the divisions beforehand and is assembled like a lattice of a balcony.
The operation on him is that the patient stops his head in the bandage; and then open the eyes of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient onions, and take that with a forceps or a basket; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until it is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that does not loosen during your operation.
And thus your insertion is the one that inserts those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the insertion of the nail, or small forceps which collect according to what will be seen in the form of it, thus in this chapter.
When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt water, or distill into the powder of red rose and similarly to those of corrosive medications, and put on the wound beforehand a coating of egg white until it is assured against abscess caution.
And if some cause of almond-like and it is lordly sanctified with caution, and fears abscess caution, then leave the wound and take care of that abscess in water that will dissolve that abscess, and then iterate over that operation until it is healed, and similarly do to the adjusted flesh which adheres in the wound of this species.
But you will cover that which entirely cures the wound frequently by natural way or by accidental way, holding with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
About the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabur comes with red veins which are tested on the wound and prohibit its vegetation, and they develop the wound in longitude of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other badness except sabur, then you collect that sabur.
And it is that you command the patient to stop his head in the bandage, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form.
or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstain from the sacred hour to hour, until you see those veins are removed from the wound and are revolving.
Be careful that you do not lead the fluid into the extremities of the spleen; and if your operation is in the morning, during the sunlight, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
When you have completed it, then distill the fluid into the chief green or red vein so that it is immediately absorbed, which is removed from the scales.
Perhaps it is not possible to collect it all at that hour, and then you apply a poultice to allay the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against postrema caution.
And then iterate over it according to the method that the doctor will manage until it is healed.
And this is the form of the poultices:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute burning medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it except that you make an apostem on its maturity, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and it becomes corrupted or blackened, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named a rough head, and it is made of iron indeed, and it is the rounded head thus as to scrape what is pointed by lime or alum for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted bone location, and then revolve it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is reduced.
And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the location with causative desiccative and styptic remedies.
Then if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and is separated from the body of the patient and remains for 40 days, and it does not relapse and does not become apostematous and does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure according to the form of the nose, and according to this method: that you discover with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take a tribo according to this form:
It is the triangular extramation of the iron, and its handle is first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then pause that over the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little with the fluid, and then revolve your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient for as long as it takes to arrive there and you feel the bad humor going out.
Then restore the location with styptic medicines that dry thus as you have experienced it.
Then since the flesh and the location are indurated, then the matter that was poured out to the affected parts before returns to its origin, so it is no longer severe about the bad humor.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the fluid.
When the fluid eminates in its totality and does not cause any harm or diminution, then it is necessary to evacuate the bad humor, and then follow, and then place ventosas on the cervical scars for good suction; and then pause over the fluid with a liniment made of acatra and aloe and insula and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice over the fluid with many powders.
And the method of the powders is that you take drapes of the lions' many powders, and each drape is duplicated in four places; and make them from those powders.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the fluid has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the ventosas with good suction on their scars; and then remove the ventosas and leave the fluid to stretch during the day and night.
Perhaps meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very stretched.
And then remove the ligament during the day and night thus as we have said.
And if sometimes the fluid has already been reduced, good, and otherwise, then iterate the poultice with powders and structure and ventosas until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the prominence of the tunica uvea.
When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and then it is prominent and proceeds outward beyond the eyelids thus as a grain of radish, and its form is arranged for that, you want to incise, then the operation is thus as we have recommended, that you introduce the needle at the root of the uvea of the lower part below the upper part, and then put another needle in which it has double filum of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double filum and raise it from that part of the uvea in the circle of the needle, and strengthen that much.
And then extract the bitter substance and place it under the hollow of the ankle, infused in a white album, and let it penetrate so that the thread is freed from the grape.
And then heal the ankle well in this way, so that the wound is comforted and the plague is healed.
Some vegetables are applied to the entire affected area around the circle of cloth next to the ankle, and then it is pierced by a subtle spatula that reaches the perimeter of the ankle, and corrects the albugineous humidity, and descends the ankle and enters as much as possible.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This ailment that is called ulcer does not exist, but rather it is a sane thing which is adjusted in the ankle resembling descending water and it is not that.
The best way to operate on it is to make the ulcer sit over the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cloth in both hands more than two parts and mauled until you see the sane thing pervading the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and the light remains, and the ulcer sees the causes thus as it was.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for descent to the sane thing in that water which we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and do so over the panniculus circle surrounding a small part of the continuity of the conjunctiva in the corneal crown (in the place you look), until the sane thing is forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the ankle hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it is cured of the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of descending water of the ankle.
We have said the species of the water in the division and what is convenient to pierce with a declarative sermon, then that secondly according to the sanity.
Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands over a copper plate and bind the dry ankle with a tight knot.
And then stop near the eyelid of the dry ankle with your left hand, if the ankle in which there is water is the left ankle; or with your right hand, if the ankle is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the alum, if the ankle is left; or with your left hand, if the ankle is right.
And then stop the extremity of the alum near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the album of the ankle on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then pour the alum into a vessel and revolve your hand in that.
And then penetrate into the album of the ankle and feel that the alum has already been conveyed to cause a void.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the alum be taken to the perimeter of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the ankle; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the ankle through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then stop the alum into the place where the water is, and then you will attract it downwards a little while, and thus if the water descends as much as possible, then you will see the ulcer which is above where the ankle reveals its sight as much as possible, and the alum in the dry ankle.
And then rest a little; thus if the water has descended, then you stop that other while before the alum is touched.
And thus when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the alum with facility, and revolve with your hand a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and in that lava the ankle deduces; and then stop the ankle coated or stopped or infused with oil rosated and album of cloth and ligature with that ankle.
But we, those who are of our time, stop above that method written in the album of cloth.
And if you do not obey your alum to the instrument of the ankle for its hardness  because it is a part of the homes where the ankle is very hard , then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called albared from which this is the form:.
And thus pierce with that conjunction, and do not extend your hand in the trachea, and it is not so that you make a way to the alum location subtly.
And then introduce the alum according to what we have said.
And you receive the compliment of your work, be prepared for the ulcerative dormitory descending faintly in which it sleeps over the dry back in a dark mansion, and be prohibited from all movements.
And stop in the nature of that water so that its nature is lined up, and do not move the dry head to the right or left part of anything.
It should be treated according to its disposition within three days.
And also extract that darkness from the cloudy mist, and examine the clear vision, and find some causes, and then return it to its treatment within seven days.
And do not cover that you make this at the time of the treatments or almost return the infusion. Having covered that you remove it for so that the water pours out gradually and strongly, with great and violent flow.
Perhaps it happens that an abscess forms slowly, then cover that you extract the fluid from within seven days, and correct what is there that causes the abscess.
Then you have freed the vision of it and paused over the face of its orifice to regulate the evacuation of it, that it may be discharged for some days, existing in the cloudy mist.
And then you will be freed from that cloudy mist gradually and convert into its causes.
And you know that in the treatment it is not excused to omit some vigils of vision, and then you will be hardened about the operation.
And already we have arrived at the knowledge of some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that they made a hole in the Ayrac mountain, perforated in which water is succeedingly flowing out.
Perhaps emperor, I have not seen anything like this in our land, which has perfected water, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancient writers; and it is possible that this is a new thing.
And these are the forms of the species of Magdaan, so that they may be above those which ignore them.
And they are made of iron or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as it is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse adjusted flesh growths of which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a foot polyp; and this illness is called polyp because it has a resemblance to that foot represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the evil depart from your hands and place it in the sun, and clean the nostrils of it, and pierce the thin skin of those flesh. And then extract that from the divided parts before, and then insert that which you have comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part into another so that you know that all the flesh is restored; for if it remains of it any cause of which the abscess is possible, then you will find that with one of the subtle instruments facilitated to remove any cause. Perhaps it happens that an abscess forms slowly, then you pause at the one that covers; or it is of the malignant abscesses, then you touch and cauterize that within so that it may be absolved sound and all the cavities are restored.
And then you will be purged in the nose, then you agree to inject air or water. Perhaps it happens that the nose is opened and of its processes humidity enters into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Perhaps it happens that the humidity does not penetrate as it covers, then you know that it is flesh wounds in the purulent ulcers of the nostrils which have not been absolved.
Therefore then you cover that you introduce faith in the one which is some grossness, and anoint in the foot anointed, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or month, and engender the evil and introduce one extremity of the faith into the nostrils with the ray or at another cause which is possible.
And since that aura is made, which attracts the sieve's ornament into the channels of the nostrils, and it is established over the sieve's globe, because many vigils resemble this action in making the infants at the schools, and it is a gentle cause for one who wants to do it.
And then you pause the two extremities of the faith, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then you administer serrature of flesh with the anointed ones that are in the faith, and make it so that you know that the flesh is already in the anointed ones of the faith.
And then you extract the faith, and pause in the nose then abstracting the healthy one with a calm water, and make it so for three days or more until all that is corrupt of the flesh is removed.
And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Perhaps it happens that the treatment is exhausted, use that one instead.
And this is the form of the instrument to cleanse and purify the nostrils in which oils and medicines are distilled.
And if you make a small box of silver or copper, which looks like a little lantern or small container, and the meat seems similar.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the handle of the instrument should be flat and uncovered; which should be held in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to suck out of its oil or that which you want to remove from the underlying causes.
Chapter 25.
They are born naturally at the extremities of the nose.
Polyps grown are born naturally at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned in several days within which a polyp is legion regarding its observation.
And for that reason you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that. Then pause on the area or apply a cautery or medicine that burns, which is in place of it.
If the insertion is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it has become putrid, hard, of dark color and of little sensation, then do not touch that iron quart which is cancerous aposteme; because polyps grown have inserted this aposteme within due to great malice towards that which it had.
And if the aposteme is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the insertion is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and insert them without fear, and cure the area with water that exits and constricts until it is healthy.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
You know that when you achieve a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer benefits in that operation unless in some homes.
Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and afterwards cure it until it is healthy.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is clear that you should extract each part of its apparent code until nothing remains. And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and on those sprinkle holy dragon's powder and apply a triple layer of emplastrum diafinicon, or some other consolidating emplasters, and leave that liat for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another emplaster, and leave it until the flesh is well-scraped, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healthy.
Perhaps the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles thus as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread thus as you and I have made known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Polyps grown have found some homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes hard resembling fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore it is clear that you convert the lips and find each of those hard parts of the whole, and then remove the flesh with umpliscas, and afterwards strengthen the holy place until it is well-restrained, and then wash it with a gentle agreement and cure the area with water that is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
About the insertion of adjusted flesh in the gums.
Many polyps are born over the adjusted gum flesh which the ancient physicians called albumin, therefore it is clear that you suspend it with onion or hold it with forceps and insert it beneath the root, and let the healthy blood flow or the holy blood.
And then pause on the holy place well-strengthened or other stipulated powders or exciting ones.
And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the root of iron teeth.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums, scorched and rough, lichenous, and some polyps are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by water and the teeth are lichenous.
Therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your knees and place their head on your thigh, and gently touch their teeth to those which appear to be affected by similar pains and causes, so that none of them are removed without a reason, and it is done for the blackness and bitterness and other inward afflictions.
So if it is established that it is in those of the beginning of the reason, well; and otherwise, then you will iterate the reason over those to another day and second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that the teeth have need of many roots of diverse forms and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation. And for this reason the roots of the teeth are those which are separated from the partition of the teeth, and another root is that which is rough among the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots you should prepare those which will be seen soon.
Chapter xxx.
On the extraction of teeth.
Because you should cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delay in total extraction of it, for there is no cause that supplants the evacuation of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which is the excuse for the extraction of it.
Moreover, because the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you should firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for many evacuations alleviate the pain and convince that it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how do you certify which is the painful tooth, and what you know to be, then it is necessary that you scarify around the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gingiva of the entire partition, and then mauk those in the teeth said, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
And then apply a strong hold with great force for good eloquence or strong stoppage, and pause the head of the patient between the teeth, which holds that they do not move, and then draw out the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so that you do not shake it, nor does the major pain of the patient cease.
And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place that there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done at the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing out of that tooth and strengthen those in the extremity of a subtle root so that it is not trinkled at the time of your construction upon it.
And it is necessary that you operate with expertise in the scarification around the entire part of the gingiva and guard your strength so that you do not shake it and remove the partition of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what the ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity about the extraction of theirs, lest they do not administer what we have recommended; for many evacuations come to the bad homes with great difficulties which are more difficult than those that are extracted, and the roots of theirs remain entirely, or some of those, or that you extract those from the osses of the mandible thus as many evacuations have testified.
And then the extraction of it is washed with the mouth in eight days or agreed upon salt.
And if you find fluxes of blood for a while, thus as many evacuations find, then apply some quantity of wax and asperegys on the wound, and if it does not confer that wax, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle holders which are used to extract the tooth at the beginning is of long extremity, short handle and large, so that they are not doubled when one has to operate with those.
And thus as many times of large handle until when you hold them in your hands they are not doubled, they are short extremities.
And there are made of Indian iron instruments with straight extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth which ones enter into the others and hold for strong construction, and some evacuations have extremities like the beak of a bird called cicnia, so it is held, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter xxvi.
On the extraction of teeth and dislocation of the bones of the injured mandibles.
When you need to extract a tooth which is stuck for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause on the spot with a border for one day or two until the spot is mollified; and then insert the instrument or holders with extremities which are assembled like the beak of a bird called cicnia or guanta, in the form of forceps.
The external limbs are similarly affected by cold humors that infiltrate them like lime or alum.
And if you do not obey your own judgment in these forceps or tenaculas, then it is necessary to operate on the affected area and dissect all the flesh and entrails, using an instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And let the thick outer layer of skin be briefly and gently removed, and not be swollen so that it does not become constricted.
Then if the affected area is not opened up, well; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular-shaped external limb in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle external limb.
And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form suitable for the following. and with other instruments which precede in scraping of teeth; because juvenation is done with this instrument which is assembled to a large hook, and this is the form.
of the triangular-shaped external limb curved or short, which has some thickness, and not be swollen so that it does not become constricted.
And another thing you know is that the instruments for teeth are moved thus and similarly to the other instruments.
The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to their materials according to what they signify, the operation and various illnesses; because they are among the illnesses that the ancients did not diagnose nor pause with their own instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Moreover if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are constricted, or if they are porous, then be careful about that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form.
And let there be some small thickness gradually, and let it be tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is opened up; and then restore the place with medicines conveniently adapted to that.
Moreover if there is small porosity in the bone, then scrape that porosity and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, and especially when they protrude in women, and especially in venerable old men; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or ligament it, then root out that one; moreover if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you excavate that with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a boar's mouth, and make it sharp like Indian steel from the external pointed edge.
And let your excavation be in which you excavate that one in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it not be joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to lime, then lime that one with lime of Indian steel of which this is the form.
And let it be all of Indian steel and sharp marguez; and let it be of many small points thus like lime on which they are made agulhas, on which the tooth is limed a little at a time in many days with facilitation, so that no other tooth is joined and falls out. And then file it away in the fig tree, and scrape that one with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is constricted and touches the tongue, then it is necessary that you file away that one until the aspersion of that fraction is stopped and enclosed, and let it be applied so that the tongue does not touch it nor the speech does not corrupt.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of teeth with gold or silver foil.
When concussion and removal occur through percussion or through falling, and the illness cannot be strengthened over what it affects, and you have treated that one with styptic medicines, and your cure has not been of value, then so that they do not fall out in those that are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver turns greenish and is porous after several days, but gold at no time becomes muddy.
And let the gold foil be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosity of the gold foil between two teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the web of the healthy tooth on the other side. And then iterate the process until the part of which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not loose.
And your constriction be the one that strengthens the veins of the teeth that do not decay.
Then remove the superfluous fibers from the tooth with forceps or tongs, and add those to any place in the gesture, and convert them into occult between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not cause lesion on the tongue. Then release that thus strayed cum Roman.
Maybe it is dislocated or ruptured, strengthen it or them with another tooth in such a manner that it is entirely at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two decayed, thus as it happens to these joined ones.
And when it happens that one returns a tooth or two to their proper place, and they are re-attached thus as we have recommended, and they remain.
And do not make anything unless you are skilled artisans.
And some evacuated are apt for some cause of the cow's bones, and it is made from their form as a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the incision of the ligament which you see in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which you find below the tongue sometimes is or is naturally in the one that men use, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, his existing head being in the tie; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Maybe there is some hardness or induration, and it has been steady for consolidation of the wound, then you make an incision and dissect according to the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fracture in the pincer of the flesh and that you dissect here with great care and avoid a flow of blood.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with warm water or with wine or with cool water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licking; thus it is customary to hold the patient beneath the tongue at some time so that another wound is not consolidated.
Maybe there is an accident of blood flow, pause at the vitriolic place thrice; maybe if the blood comes, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this. And then that cure is for other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an abscess forms, similar to a small tumor, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnificent until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth in front of the light and examine the abscess.
And if you find it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that quartan crisis.
And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on him, and incise with a subtle spatula, and incise all around; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause for three hours, thus it is vitriolic, until the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have treated it with a complement of him, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that with another cure adapted to this until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of abscesses from two ears and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of other abscesses.
When you find in the gullet a godat, so they are glands which are assembled together, which occur before and are called two ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; beforehand let it be until it matures, and then you can operate on it, or it will be broken for itself.
And if it is of white color, radish, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
And the operation on him is that you consider, during your operation, if it has already rested the abscess of his cautious remedy or if it has been diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in the tie, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands before the tongue beneath with a noble instrument of which this is the form.
It should be made of silver or copper, and it should be subtle as a knife.
Then as you press with your tongue and it shows you the aposteme, and cut above that same tender spot, then take nine and place it in the amulet, and pull it to the parted areas as much as you can. Another thing that you extract from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing that you extract from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled with forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, thus that the orifice of each one of them is in the interior of the other, very pointed, which is of iron indeed inbuilt.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient's gums with cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, apply cold water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to that of the stopping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it until it is healthy.
And some evacuated abscesses in the gulley other apostemes like those two golden veins, and incise them according to what you have said and dictated in the incision of two veins in a circle.
And you have already medicated a woman with an aposteme which was born in her gulley, the aposteme tended to a dark color, of little sensation, which had almost closed her gulley, and the woman breathed with great stricture, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was perverted unto death if she had stayed like that for one day or two.
And the aposteme had so much swelled that it had formed two ramps until they emptied through two conduits.
Then you carefully dissected it and placed it in one of their holes, and pulled it, and extracted from the large portion, and then you incised that which comprehended the other conduit, and then you opened the patient's mouth, and comprehended their tongue, and then you placed the hole in that aposteme.
And then you removed a large part of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood. Then the gulley of that woman was absolutely free, and she began to drink water, and then took viands, then you did not cease to incise that aposteme much because it was prolonged for a long time, and the aposteme succeeded in its place, which incised until it was prolonged.
Then you healed it and cauterized the gulley of it, then thus of addiction; and then you walked and did not know that God did that miracle for me.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a hollow when it is apostematous.
When the hollow is catarrhed, and it is apostematous and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with that which we have said in the division, and it does not conform to your cure, and sometimes it happens that the aposteme remains hidden from it and is subtle, then it is necessary that you incise what is added round; and if it is at its length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its sentiment, then it is necessary that you make an incision of it, because there is fear about the patient.
And when you sometimes do it according to the method that you have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient seize with your tongue and press with an instrument of which proceeds in its form and then places the hole in the new one, and pulls it down and incises it with one of two instruments which are said in the incision of two veins.
And it is necessary that you do not incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you incise more, you will let the blood flow out.
And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two veins, and cure it until it is healthy.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, it is necessary that you use art in the cauterization of it with fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the tender spot, and then press with your tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and conforms to that living cause, and pause it not sparse nor subtle, and fills the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
The extraction of the cavity where the medicine is placed, like a hollow cylinder of ray, and place the instrument in the medicine on the valve, and the patient spits over the shoulder cloth so that corrosive saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not obstruct the internal medicine, so that it does not impede the gullet of the patient.
And then put your hand in the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until it becomes disinfected and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a thread and envelop it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the thread in the medicine, and introduce the ray into the thread through a canal until the thread adheres to it, and do this many times until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the uva, and then leave it so that it will cicatrize and fall off after three or four days.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then apply the cauterization by burning in a circle on the uva with thread embedded in border, and notify that which is in the circuit of the patient's medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand by embrocation, and remove the gargling symptoms until it is sanitized.
And this species of cure is more salvific than incision and longer in duration.
Some wounded eyes are cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of theirs, into a bag, and let them steep in wine vinegar, and boil; and the bag should be well sealed, and place it in the middle of the bag a tube, upon which is placed an instrument made of silver or copper according to this manner; it is done with silver or copper.
And then introduce the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uva through the pipe, so that the uva is not too obstructed.
And then iterate over those many wounded places until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the commencement of the advent of apostemas, because it would too much adjust in the apostema, and do not think that you are doing that, but rather declare the apostema of the patient's caution.
Maybe if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the patient's closed mouth, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closure of the mouth prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of spines and that which adheres to the gullet and other causes.
Many wounded places adhering to the gullet or spine of feet or some other cause.
Then you will extract what is apparent from those, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the gullet.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the gullet, you will make the patient vomit by inducing that the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the gullet will be forced out by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or radish of lettuce or a dry loaf of bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed sponge, and tie it strongly with thread, and then pass the patient through that, so that as they spin and are extracted, then they will be forced out. And maybe take an eel and bind it with strong thread, and place it on the table and afterwards it will be extracted; or take a porpoise and afterwards extract the intestines and afterwards extract the entrails.
Maybe if you do not force out those causes which we have discussed, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is more gross than a small ray, and in the extremity of the patient's cavity which you introduce into their gullet with ease.
And the old man raises his head to them, and beware that the touch of the old bones of the gullet, so that it does not injure the body or that which pierces the bone or spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
Maybe the emperor orders that the patient who introduces himself is freed, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pierces in them, and pulls his hand with the instrument on them, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forced out.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood congealed and annexed to the gullet.
When blood is treated with the aforementioned medicine in the division of the cure and not comforted, consider then the patient's language in the Golayro's soliloquy, since you have comprehended the tongue of the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the blood treatment, extract it with a small knife or subtly handle it with delicate gestures.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's soliloquy, and place a fiery iron in the cavity of the cannula, and make as many turns (until the blood treatment is dead and removed from the soliloquy) and abstain from the patient for the entire day of water.
And then take a full vessel of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not transgress from that cause and mix the water for an hour, then another on their hand, because the blood treatment is just as sensitive to the cold water.
Moreover, if it is not forgotten what you have recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument that you have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do it, because it is four times a year.
And it is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, which is to take a pipe on which are ignited carbonized coals and the pipe is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and then descend under the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood treatment, because the blood treatment is changed four times.
And if it does not work, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from the patient's drinking, and eat salty foods and soups, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen should not be forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the blood treatment of the soliloquy is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape: which is placed on the soliloquy, and its extremity is similar to a beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which is sharpened with a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not leave.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many special kinds, of many manners, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs for two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and for that which you comprehend of the humidities.
And the second manner is proper to the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and the abscess in the carnal place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them has its judgment for operation.
And many abscesses are such that they cover that they are not perforated but rather matured by the sania in those or complete them.
Other abscesses cover that they are wounded when they are crossed, and they do not mature according to their compliment, just like abscesses that are proper to the joints, because an abscess when it has a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can pour out what is in its circuit, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it is a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess proper to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, you will not harm the principal member; or it is proper to the buttocks, therefore perforate what has not matured, and do not cover that they perforate crudely, from incomplete digestion, but rather that which is proper to the buttocks, so that you do not pour out its essence and it is elongated to the divided parts of the buttocks, and it is a fistula, or it is done in the term of it that it is not healthy. Many cover that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it matures.
And you know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the ceasing of fever, and then the diminution of the rigor and of the pulse, and the acuity of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And because you cover that you know the perforation will occur in the place where the pus is beneath the abscess and where the pus comes from the cure of the eminence.
And perforation is sometimes through the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the ligaments, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that member.
When the aposteme is in a fleshy location, it is advisable to delay perforation until it is confirmed that digestion is taking place according to the usual process, as we have previously stated; for if you perforate at that time, it will prolong the body of the patient's disease and make his lips ulcerous and the depth of the wound more putrid.
Sometimes apostemes are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or the condition of the body, or according to the necessity of which the affected member indicates.
And it is necessary to administer small perforations, and in large apostemes a great and wide perforation or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the apostemes.
And other times of the apostemes in which it is necessary that the coding be overcome and be enclosed, when it is done thus, it will be in a term that already exists, just like one who accumulates in drops of dubellum and of bubbles.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, just like the apostemes of the veins.
And of theirs in which a round section is administered and a lunar section, and they resemble those.
Sometimes that which cannot be seized thus like the superficial apostemes of lions, it is necessary to perforate with a superficial perforation, or to plane only on the surface.
And it is necessary when the aposteme is large and has collected much sania, that you perforate it and do not think to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then you apply oil to the aposteme until another day, and then you extract a larger part, and then you make many evacuations according to gradation until it is fully purged.
And it is especially so if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved to expel the sania, and it will quickly kill the patient, and you will operate on them.
Be careful in this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these apostemes, because you will cleanse the wounds and consider therefore if the wound of the aposteme is small, or it is a flat section, then you will administer the remedies of oil or of anti-irritant coto; and if the aposteme is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause in some tract until they come to an end.
And if in the aposteme a part of the coding is abscessed or has concaved into the circuit, then it is necessary that you complete it with anti-irritant coto oil or with a thread of drap from flax, just like when you have treated pans or razizos, with humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to cure what is necessary to remove the engorgements until it is sanitized.
Sometimes if there is a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and wine in which you mix a thread of flax, and pause that over the location of the blood flow, many evacuations.
Sometimes if the blood flow persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure, and powder with those that have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Sometimes if it is in winter time, and the location of the aposteme is a location of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices with wine and oil, and pause those over the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you pause poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be cool until the third day, as we have said, and then it is necessary that you dislodge the aposteme and cleanse it and administer the cure of what is convenient to it until it is sanitized.
And thus it is necessary to know the cure of apostemes universally, sometimes according to the way of distinction already said about each aposteme in which manner it is the way of curing it by chapters separately.
Chapter 41.
On the section of apostemes which come in the coding of the head.
In the coding of the small head, little apostemes, and so of species of nodes which contain tunics that are at their fact; and the species of theirs are many.
And they are pungent, and of those that contain humidity similar to lime. And of those that contain humidity similar to pores, and they resemble them; and of those that are lapideous, hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those that are not fearful, as one must extract those that do not cause contradictory archeria.
And the operation in section of those is that you spread them with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Because if there is moisture that retains humidity, then separate it with a dry cloth according to the length for superficial separation in this manner:
It begins at the separation of the line of B, entering to the line of G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of those causes of total, because many weakened returns, if it remains from some cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and let it enter another day, because I corrode everything so that it removes all from that skin.
And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink again and thirdly if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this method: It has the form of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape everything from that entire partition, and extract your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Perhaps if you have made a mistake, then do the opposite, so that you can rectify it primarily.
And similarly do in the lapified abscess of incision and cure according to what you have said; and incision over the lapified abscess is less grievous, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some old women know about these abscesses which are on the head of some men who have none of that humidity; which causes it because you have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus with a rough, harsh, white, which could not be pierced, and if someone has touched that percussion, it would plague.
Perhaps in the other accidental abscesses on the head there is not this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and devour the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these should be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those parts from the lower part of their skin, so that the body of the wound is alleviated at the lower parts.
And then heal those things with what is convenient for that cure.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Many weakened returns are caused by these abscesses on the neck and in the axillae and in the joints; and some weakened returns occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own proper tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofula are many, because some of them are lapified, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you find with good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of that which is manifest is similar to the color of the codena, and it is mauled throughout the entire part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not preoccupied, because you incise it with superficial incision from above the part down to the line of G., entering the line of B., and scrape that entire part, and extend two lips of the codena on one side, or many sides if there is need of those, thus as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more caution that neither the vein nor nerve should be incised.
And it is more careful that you do not adjust your hand in incision, or quiet the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause in the vetriol plaster or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and let it enter until it repauses the acuity of the abscess and mollifies the plague and begins to be puerperal. When the blood is absorbed.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then investigate if there is some cause of the other small scrofula, so incise them and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, because then you should not incise that scrofula from its root. Besides, because it seems that you have made a double strong faith and leave it until it falls by itself without being noticed.
And then fill the wound of the cut thigh which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and take care to cure it.
And if you incise that entire scab, then be sure to adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much as possible so that no excess flesh remains.
Perhaps you see that excess flesh has remained due to the greatness of the scab, be sure to understand how to incise the root of it, and separate it and administer a suture, and that is what is said.
And in those scabs that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the place of maturation of it, and stop the perforation of what you see is the pus at the bottom of the ulcer, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with warm ointments and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then take care to apply an ointment of generating flesh inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the pillow of the accidental aposteme next to the goulard.
They dislodged these abscesses from this section in the pillowy swelling, and we did not see anyone in our land who had made it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon about those.
Perhaps in the men who have had an accident, be sure that the extraction of the pillowy swelling is avoided, because for that reason it will not be made quickly, so that all the veins and major parts of the thigh are here.
Perhaps in those who have abscesses burst in the mouth or goulard or two aurelia, when the badness is not in the cane, be sure to use the section of pillowy swelling to flee from the loss which is made by perforation.
Then be sure when we want that, to incise the pillowy swelling beneath three circles of the circles of the pillowy swelling, or four with a small section for the latitude in what is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of the blood which are there.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then be sure that he extends the cord of the goulard with an onion, and then inserts the cord inside so that it reaches the canal, perhaps to avoid the blood vessels if you see them because of some other cause.
And then incise the cleft according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the relaxation of what is of that excess matter which is of the disrupted and for the abortion of the void.
And then the wound will be open for some time.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew that alone to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow inside so that it may be healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these apostemes have already pillowy-swollen the goulard of the thigh, and the thigh has come to death, and its wing is between- cut, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh may breathe on the place of the wound for some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for that reason I command to leave the wound open until the evil of the badness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command thus the wound, and take care of it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my metaphors, is that a servant held a knife and put it in the goulard of his thigh and incised with one part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the healing of it, and I buried the mungent thus as it is buried by the dead, and discovered the wound and buried the blood which was issuing from the small wound.
Then I must confess that it had not incised a vein nor guided, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I took care of it until it was healed.
And do not accuse the servant if he does not return to the void, and then some days returned to the administration of their own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the pillowy swelling there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the section on the abscess that occurs in the goulard beforehand, and it is called hernia of the goulard.
This abscess named hernia of the goulard is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more in women.
And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
The accident is caused by two manifold forms of which one resembles swollen nodes, and the other form resembles an abscess made by arterial node inflammation, and in that there is fear. And it does not cover the surface of the tumor with iron except in one that is small. And you probe that and investigate with the aforementioned, and if you find it resembles swollen nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise thus with the nodes, and extract what contains the pus and serum; and otherwise, then the entire tissue is scrutinized, and you carefully cure the area that requires healing until it is healthy.
Chapter 45.
On the section of species of nodes.
Of the nodes, there are many species and I have already said all the species of theirs in the division.
And it covers how I recommend distinguishing the difference between a node and an abscess with surface doubtfulness.
Therefore I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the excess is reduced; and it is a complete putrid decay that when it ceases, the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But a node is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that thick cloudy liquid which is in its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, whether they are fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore it covers, when you approach the cure of a node, that you expose and inquire into its beginning with instrumental stirring which is called introgression, according to how you will find its form in the chapter that is apropos to this.
And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the humid place which you find in the abscess, and you rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the bottom.
And finally you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and finally extract the introgression and consider what is left in the remnants of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise on the surface section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
And if in the remnants of the introgression there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
And cut above it with a crosswise incision having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus you will instruct, and suspend that which is incised, and excavate the bottom of all parts to facilitate, and guard the skin or sac, if possible, above that and extract that sania from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many things are seen ending there, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of any cause.
Because if none of the causes remain, little or much, the node returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause over that which sits as a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
And if it is a large node, then you cut the two lips of it and cure it with what surrounds it.
But if the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsatile, then you touch and fill the place of three tractions that are vitriol and let it stand for two days or for three until the plague is purged and the inflammation of the wound repauses; and finally return to incise what remains of the node.
Chapter 46.
On the forms of necessary instrumental stirring in section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of introgressions, and they are of three species, which of those is large, and of those is medium, and of those is small.
The form of large introgression is this:
The form of small introgression is this:
Thus they are made of iron, of alloy, of well-shaped extremities, so that they fasten the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of experiences, and they are named "albered", and one of those is called "berid".
And they are of three species, because of those is large, medium, and small.
The form of large experience, form of it:
The form of medium experience, form of it:
The form of small experience, form of it:
It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and buboes, so that among them are of the bones and of other causes.
And they are often red and swollen, like large ulcers on the joints that have become inflamed, and are caused by critical humor or by iron, or by copper, or by silver; And the worst is when they are caused by critical humor.
They are often the experience of black plum, which ones believe that for those there have been opened abscesses in the cavity of which they are reflected, that are reflected upwards with their levity in those reflections.
And they are of three species, because some of them have long channels, and others narrow ones, and others broad ones, according to the quantity of the matter of the abscess and the structure of it.
Shape of a large experience of plum:
Shape of a narrower experience of plum:
Shape of a small experience of plum:
The forms of the ulcers are of many species, because some of them have simple channels, which ones have a single curvature only, and they are of three species: large, small, and narrow.
And their ulcers are round, and they are of three species.
And those ulcers have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And their ulcers have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all these things are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple ulcer, shape of it:
Shape of a large ulcer having two curvatures: Shape of a narrower ulcer having two curvatures: Shape of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
Shape of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
Shape of a narrower ulcer having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and apostemes, and they are of three species, because some are large, narrower, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a narrower scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those are which ones have been made sharp and the other extremities not-sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather for making a gentle incision on the nodes to avoid the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be comforted and tranquilized a little before the adjustment, which adjusts away from the excoriation of the aposteme.
And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, narrower, and small, like veils.
They are caused by critical humor and are similar to the rays that come from it, and they make alkaline.
And it is in the extremity of the pointed spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and before, when you want, like vessels.
The forms of spatulas, which ones are adapted between the fingers to perform the perforation of the apostemes and do not harm the patients, and they are of three species: large, narrower, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventouses which ones absorb the flow of blood, and they are of three species; large, narrower, and small; their forms:
They are caused by critical humor, round and with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of ventouses are large, narrower, and small, so that they absorb the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
However, they do not use them to absorb blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy places, like on the muscles of the arms and thighs, and on the muscles of the chest, and of the abdomen, and of the groin, and similarly to those of the fleshy muscles.
And some veins are made of those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is absorbed when it is made by phlebotomy, or by cutting a vein or an artery.
And some veins are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which ones are similar to those of women.
Some veins are swollen in the breasts of some men who have the compliment of sleeping with women, and they have swollen breasts, and they are similar to the breasts of women, and Roman apostemes, wounds.
And to that one who has it, cover what is inflamed in the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then thoroughly clean the entire affected area, and fill the ulcer with incarnate medicinal plaster, and adjust the two lips of the ulcer in a circular manner, and cure that which is inside.
Perhaps the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its greatness, thus it extends to the women, then it will be divided into two equal sections resembling a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this form, from line B to line G. And then clean the channel that is between the two lips of the ulcer, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which covers the inflammation of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then cover the ulcer with cotton submerged in corrosive liquid and let it corrode what is rough from the graysness, and then cure that which is inside until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
About the perforation of abscesses that occur below the navel.
These abscesses that occur below the navel are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a fluid that is sacred.
And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity cover what is inflamed in a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the healthy one, then you complete it with much cotton and leave it inside for another day.
And then the cotton should be steady and cured in a convenient wrapping according to what is needed, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of knots, and of scrofula, then you dissect above that thus as we have said in the section about scrofula, including.
Perhaps the ulcer is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it the cautery according to what we have previously stated about that.
Chapter 49.
About the section of abscesses that occur through arteria or vein.
When the artery is broken, and the channel is consolidated which is above that, then many veins occur with abscess. And signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through the artery, it is long aggregated in the region of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
And that which is through the vein is recognized by the obvious signs of the body.
And the section about this abscess is erroneous, and it increases in that which is below the wings, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore cover that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, cover that it should be evacuated.
Perhaps about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, dissect in the channel section at length; and then open the section with an inch and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then place the needle above that agulha and make it penetrate until the other side, and strengthen the artery with double filament in two places,  which causes you to have a syringe in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer cure to that which is generated poor until the ligaments relax; and then cure it with convenient wrappings according to what is needed until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess by section of vein, then cover that you hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in the channel, and then introduce the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double filament until you extract from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ligament according to what has been said to you about the ligament of the grapevine of two parts at two extremities of the filament.
Perhaps you fear that you will extract the filament, then introduce the thread with that needle below all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until when you sit what is in it, then you dissect the superfluity of the channel, and let that which is of it be freed.
And then stop on the pillow that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is done with warm compresses and poultices until it is healthy.
Chapter on abscesses which occur due to twisting of nerve roots.
Thus, abscesses occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in the nerves when they occur in their percussion or occur due to superfluous struggle, and for similar reasons.
And it is done in the muscles of the patient's joints or ankles, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the major dispositions of their own and when it is straitened with vehemence, it is felt in the patient as a similar stupor.
And it is not an abscess gathered in the chest of the body, and therefore the codena (cod liver oil?) is administered, and it is weakened throughout the entire affected area and does not reach the parts above nor below.
So it is clear that those who are in the joints do not think that they are being invaded by iron, because their strong endeavour is against contraction.
More, he who is in the head or forehead feels the cod liver oil in a spatula. More, if it is a small abscess, then you have the forces and abolish the root of that.
And if it is large, then you suspend it in a hook, and excavate that, and then stop that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 50.
On the section of abscesses that occur from the humor that occurs in the belly.
It happens to some people who have worn-out stomachs and in other parts of the body of those whose humors are called fungal because of similarity with fungi, of which the root is subtle andin the head of that it is large; and already their lips are converted, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in their belly there were two humors which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white humors, of small root.
And already their lips were turned inward and were split, and moisture flowed from that entire time.
So I have dissected them and attributed it to the one in whose feet there were 18 ulcers. and the other who had six ulcers.
And the operation in their dissection is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of their humor is white, humid, with subtle root; then you dissect them with a broad spatula, and be in your presence with caution, because many worn-out stomachs expel much sacred matter; and if you want to cauterize the sacred matter, cauterize it.
And if the patient is pale and timid, beware of dissection with iron; more then take a recently made poultice of lead, and strengthen it on that humor, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the structure of the lead wire; thus, do not cease strengthening the large lead poultice that is in the humor, until it is abolished and falls through its own struggle.
More, if it is of large root, then in its dissection there is some cause of fear and of pale, and mainly in the one who is in the belly.
More, it is possible that you dissect the death of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healthy.
And beware that you do not attempt to dissect the humor which is of dark color, of little feeling, of lazy regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I find remembrance of cancer in this way also.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is done for many causes; or for fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and sometimes of it the fabric or intestine according to what emerges from other ruptures; or for sacred matter that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or for constricted ventilation in it.
More, if it is for fissure of the ciphac and for ulceration of the fabric, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it has a lion's pain, and then appears with diverse symptoms. And if it is for egress of the intestine, then the situation of that in the water that we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and as you take that in the ties of the occultated ones, and then returns; and strongly it is in the water so, and it is magnified much by the introit of bath and vehement struggle.
More, if it is for humidity, then it is a lion and not occultated when you take it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to blood, then do so with questioning signs that appear as dark-red spots declining.
But if it is due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity.
But if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the artery, or of a vein, or due to windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and pain, just as it is written in the chapter where he said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their sieving well, and it should be extended straight; and then you will feel with your hand in the circle of the entire navel, and then command them to stand bent between their thighs above the sieving, and then circle around the space of the navel above the area where you felt with your hand; and then extend the greatness of the abscess to the upper parts in a large quantity; and then place it in the circle with a strong or weak hand, according to the decent manner of the liar.
And then you will uncover the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert the aforementioned finger into that index and you will feel the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded it through the ligament, then you extract the excessive and impel the intestine to the inner parts of the belly.
And if you have touched the membrane, then take it in a grasp; and you will remove its excesses.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that motion, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circle where you felt around the abscess in a manner of crosses, which make them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts above the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh falls and it will close by itself; or remove that which is subtle and it will close, and then cure that part which needs to be cleansed so that it may be healthy.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess thus as we have said and expel the blood or humidity, which you will find in it, and then cure that part which needs to be cured and consolidate the area.
Chapter 53.
On the Cure of Cancer.
We have said, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is via the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid it in the cure so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is generated in the marrow and caution of its cure.
And I will show you the ancient teachings that some rooted cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus as of cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and its similar members allocated to extract all that, and especially when it begins small.
But when it is ancient and large, it does not matter that you take possession of it, because you will not be able to heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor that it has reached that point.
And the operation on it is that which is allocated thus as we have said, it is that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black bile some rooted cancers, and then you will know that, if it is touched with a full manifest recovery.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which is located the operation, and then prohibit in the crossing of the veins which need to be taken to that; and then concave from all parts of the code a good perexcrutiation so that no root cause of it remains. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that leakage, and express the places, and absterge the gross blood all at your hand or with an instrument at which it is possible for you to use the instruments.
But if you have made counterflow of gross blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure that with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 54.
On the Cure of Hydropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of hydropsy timpanist with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been debilitated, or is in another bad hydropsy, thus as it is in the entire belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
When you see the patient has an excess of vertiginous humor, and it's not another illness but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of operation is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister presses their extreme belly with their hand, while injecting water into the parted perineum, and then takes a spiny spatula according to this form.
They are of two sharp points, sharp extremities, thus with the spatula; but I will insert it slowly, little by little, so that during the operation nothing enters into the intestine, and that leads to that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropic humor is from the intestines, because then it's necessary that you have sectioned to the navel for three fingers' breadth below, on the right side of the perineum.
But if the generation of hydropic humor is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers' breadth.
And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And it's necessary that your section is above the rib on which you want to place the patient so that they don't accumulate excessive fluids at that loose location.
And then perforate with the instrument the entire code, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphaec, and you extract it; and if it's the quantity of a fingernail or around.
And then perforate the siphaec until you reach the spot where you want to introduce the spatula, and that's the place of the water. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or gilt lion, at the lower part of which there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it's shaped like a feather's extremity according to the manner of plumage, thus as described.
And at the upper extremity of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately draws over the instrument, and evacuates the water in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it's not suitable at that time, for it would kill the patient by resolution of their animal spirit, or it would hasten their death which is approaching.
But evacuate that according to the quantity of its vertue and according to what the patient's disposition signifies to you, concerning the vertue of their pulse and their goodness.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it's immediately retained by the code which retains the tube that is above the siphaec, of which I recommend to you that you perforate according to that manner.
And then iterate with the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for several days over fear, and beware of error so that you don't remain with too much water.
But if you fear about the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that one by burial in hot sand, and move to a bath, and await for a long time under the sun; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until they are healthy.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and liver, regarding the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which has preceded.
The end.
On the treatment of children who are born with non-perforated urinary places.
Some born children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a straight tube or is not in its place).
Then it's necessary to perforate the instrument as soon as it's born with a very subtle spatula according to this form:
And then pause in the tube a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you for three days or for four.
And when they want to urinate, it's retained and held back; and then return that.
And if you don't pause the lead, it's possible that the urine which goes over the place, will not leave that clarity.
But that one whose tube is straight should be medicated with a lead key, thus as we have said, for many days until it's amplified.
But those in whom the tube is not in its place, are led astray, because of those, that one which is born and the tube deviates from the end of the virga, so that it cannot urinate at the designated places, until it elevates the virga with their hand at the designated places above; and it's not to their generation, for so that the sperm cannot penetrate to the mother according to rectitude, and it's a very lagging illness.
And the manner of operation is that the patient is placed on their back, and extend the head of the left arm towards your left hand with vigorous extraction, and insert the head of the arm at the site of the perforation with spatula-like agitation, as if it were a feather, or you do not cause any partition, so that the vein of the arm appears like the head of the arm and the trickle goes to the correct location according to need.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, four motives will accelerate it; and stop yourself at the moment when you are about to remove the blood, and cure the wound from within so that it heals itself.
Chapter 56.
About the white deposit that accumulates in the perforation at the head of the arm and about the corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the perforation at the head of the arm.
Four moist humors accumulate this white deposit in the arm, and it is an emanation of decaying flesh.
And one of them is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend them with a subtle unguent and remove it from within so that the entire mass is dissolved; and then pause over the subtle, miry spot with an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the arm with a diaphanous ointment from within so that it is healed.
And if the white deposit is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you apply cautery at the site of the lesion and its root.
But if the white deposit is in the perforation of the head of the arm without circumcision, and one part of the white deposit is within the perforation and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the white deposit which is within from the beginning so that it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, for when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be troubled again.
And also it is customary to accumulate in the genitals and in the perforation of black corruption, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has already been denigrated and which wants to corrupt or which has already corrupted; and then place liniments over that with good millet, which is contaminated with flour of scorched wheat and errors of trituration and crumbling.
And then cure it with another cure so that it is healthy.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
for juvenile cautery is at two opportune moments, thus there is a flow of blood and to the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the arm is corroded and totally destroyed at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perforation a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the perforation at the head of the arm (and this adhesion does not occur except in that where the perforation is sound, and no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or apostema) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the arm is liberated from all parts.
And if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some cause of the head of the arm and of the perforation, and thus it is because the perforation, when it is subtle, is strongly perforated by its subtlety, making it lighter.
And then separate between the perforation and the head of the arm with a drizzle of subtle liquid, which has already been mulched in the cool water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it is cured with a stipetic wine so that it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
About the purification of children and the cure of what accumulates in those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like the other wounds: but however with our operation and our will, and those of that should be properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle path to health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their writings, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, which causes us to have discovered the major part of the artificial and barbaric uses of circumcision and purification with a novacula and torches; and they used ligament with faith and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these manners and did not discover better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because four motifs flee from the codena downwards, because the codena of the perforation has two tunics, and one tunic is removed below, and strongly it is forbidden to another incision and sure pain. And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and it is digital, of which the Sabatiers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not assured, because strongly it enters into the troupe of him.
More in the operation use an ointment, strongly bind the fractured parts and correct your operation. And the bowel movement of the infant is brief by nature, and many times they are evacuated in such a way that there is no need for modification, and you have seen it happen.
More of the modification that is done with forceps and ligatures on the faithful, the goodness, experiment discovered to me, because the forceps are of proportional size, for which I acquire the acuteness that it is below as well as the acuteness that it was before; and thus when you take your hand so proportionally dosed, and dissect accordingly in a comparison at one time; and it makes compression of the faithful figure containing the bowel movement of the whole region, with which there can be no error.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should hold the infant more firmly if it is one of those who understand a small one, do not hold except that you place the faithful in its bowel movement only so much, and let it go into the other day.
And then rejoice in all that manner which is possible for you to receive its intelligence. And then have it stay between your hands, prepared and arranged in order, and do not let it be seen; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into its bowel movement and blow into the intestine, and pull it out so that the head of the bowel movement is visible, and then modify that which is added to it from filth.
The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Some of them are extramitated not-thwarting and the others are thwarting, so that the branch of the nail is not seen, and it is the length of the two acutenesses thus as the length of two manual handles together.
More, the error in modification is because strongly you evacuate the entire internal bowel movement, or part of it that needs dissection.
Then you should extend that from your hour to your ointment beforehand at the postulation of the place and dissect it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your ointment, then extract it in a hook and dissect it.
More, if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflated below the bowel movement postulation, then let it be until the postulation is calm, and scrape off that which is softened, and dissect it according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the bowel movement, because it will not hurt you at all.
And then cure that one with the plague consolidated from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is dissected from the intestine according to measure, and you have obtained the parts above, that will not harm you.
And more, cure that one with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression caused by stone or by congealed blood, or by rupture or by wound, and it resembles those things that we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in what we have said is vehemently done, the cause is above the patient, then you should know that you will administer extraction of it with an instrument called siringua, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and is subtle, conquering the lion's claw, thus like a canal of peacock's feather in subtlety of a ray long and similar to a palm and a half, at which there is a subtle cane in its head.
And the manner of examination of the urine is to take the warm and double-filtered fluid from the outer rim of the flank or near the good ligature; and insert the extremities of the tube into the partition below the circle, and write down the superfleas if any cause of the flank, rather introduce it into the canal with vehemence.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and encircle their waist with an olive oil bandage, and anoint them with oil of unguentum, and oil of olives and aguarridos.
And then insert the circle to facilitate its entry into the root of the vein; and double the vein above the partition of the navel; and then fill the circle with that; and then fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and this is how the patient will be relieved of the void cause, and it's not done in this order, but rather according to the method by which it goes to the tortuous vein.
And then extract the fluid from the small flank little by little, because the urine dries up the flank.
Then extract that and make a cure for the urine, and use the circle, don't stop until the water and the circle are used to evacuate the bladder and the patient has relief.
Chapter 6.
On the quality of cleansing the vesicle with a clamp and similar instruments, which are suitable for that water.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or it is congested with that, or it is constricted by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then do so with an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its form:
but since the extremity of it is dirty, it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes also another way.
At the beginning it is a concave place, where the water that is impelled is, and it follows according to the quantity that oppiles that, its addition, until when some cause is attracted from the humidity, it is attracted, and when it is expelled, with water it is attracted, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does, which is phicated naphta in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra into the humidity, and attract with that water which is impelled from the upper parts, because the humidity is attracted into the cavity of clampcedra.
And then insert the extremity of clampcedra into the vein according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills, because that humidity will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will feel it.
Form of the subtle crystal through which the bladder is crystallized, and that is its form:
And it is made of silver or gold, from which the head is poured out as if similar to a small feather, and below the canal is detained by a ligament.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then bind it between two strong ligatures with a double-filtered vein, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the crystal into the vein.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has reached the bladder.
But if you are not present at the bladder, then take a piece of parguames and make it into that circle; and pierce that with all its returnings; and then insert a strong vein into those channels, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle so that it is added also to the soothing, since you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and oils and aguas.
And then bind that to the instrument and make it so that it is made like it was made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 10.
On the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone in which the operation is performed with a hand, and its section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects the infants; and of its signs is that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels their vein, and the veins are swollen, and then it is dressed; and in that water they make a hole in the cul-de-sac in place of those.
It is the healing of children's health from that entry point where they have reached thirty-three years; and it is difficult to cure in old age. Maybe in the young ones it is worse because it is between those.
And of that one where the pain is greater and the cure is less likely; And if it is slight, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the commencement of that which modifies the patient in Christ's cross, which extracts all the filth from the sinful veins; because that filthy vein prohibits the entrance of the pain and the inquiry into it.
And then place the patient in Christ's feet and be consoled and comforted therein, so that the pain descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another filthy veins.
And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and his hands are placed under the thighs of him, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
And then seek out that entire defect.
So if you feel the pain in the void, then you will touch it at once with your dry finger over him.
And if you don't catch the entire touch at once, then it is necessary that you anoint with olive oil on the affected finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the ring finger if he is a young adult, and insert that into his hollow bottom. And seek out the pain until it is below the affected finger. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press above that with your finger, and expel it to the lower parts before you see the place of the dryness.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand downwards to the lower parts, and let his other hand remain holding the codena which is below the genitals, in the place where the dryness is made.
And then insert the spatulum beneath the incident of which this is the form. and divide in the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, beside the lace of the left thigh; and let the dryness be on that pain and the affected finger be in the anus, and let it be a transverse dryness, so that the dryness beforehand is wide and diminished according to the quantity that you feel of the pain being possible, and not greater, because you will compress the affected finger which is in the anus the pain from which the dryness is forgotten.
And you will know that of the pain there are some which have an angle and margins, because the easing of it is made difficult for that.
And of that water it is like a lion resembling a gland, and it is round, and it is made of the easier easing.
So if it is that one which has an angle and margin, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus forgotten, then it is necessary that you operate on that, or that you stretch over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on which you stretch over the pain, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Maybe if you cannot operate on that, then you amplify the tract a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a glass tube filled with vitriol.
Maybe if the pain is more than one, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over him; and then insert a little into that water; and similarly make as if you are moving more than two.
And if it is a great pain, then ignorance is that you insert that into the great dryness, because it hastens to the patient one of two causes: either death or it leads him to continuous urination, for which the place is not entirely consolidated.
Maybe administer expulsion of it from the inside until it is forgotten, or operate on the fracture of it with the forceps to extract that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and stretch that. And pause on that drape infused with oil and wine, or in rose oil and cold water, so that the postrema caution may be given.
And then reset the patient on his haunches, and do not dislodge the bandage until the third day.
And when that is dislodged, wash the place with water and much oil, and then cure it with a gentle diaphenic and diabolic remedy until it is healthy.
Maybe if in the wound apostema caution hastens, and it is adjusted and corroded, and of that it seems thus as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and for which the urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood with urine), then insert the affected finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then apply the poultice made with vinegar, water, and salt, and place it in opposition to the entire affected area, which is suitable for the healing process within, so that it may be healthy.
Take care in the hours of entire healing that you read both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and it is in the midst of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and urination is prohibited, then cure this one that you recommend beforehand so that you avoid section, because too many veins are involved in this healing and it is accused of section; and already you have experienced this, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron, the shape of which is like this:
of triangular extrication, pointed, fixed in a staff.
And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating it in such a way that the perforator comes to that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is then absorbed.
And then put your hand on what remains of the stone from the partition beforehand from the bladder, because it is crushed, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this healing is not adapted to you for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then squeeze over the stone in that bladder between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then dissolve the ligament and mollify the congealed blood, which is made into a poultice.
And it is not necessary to have a ligature of thread beneath the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is dissolved, the calculus returns to its place and collects the poultice.
And therefore it is necessary for you to have the thread above, that you elevate the calculus to the upper parts, or that it returns to its own complement, and collects the poultice as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stones from women's bladders.
A stone in women's bladders is rarely generated.
But if a stone is in some of those, then the healing of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman's bladder is weak.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who is skilled in describing her own measurements to the doctor when it is cast, or it is from women having husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with her own hand.
And the fourth is that the place of section above the stone in women's bladders is far from the place of the stone, because it requires a deep section, and in that there is fear.
But if it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take care that you take a wise woman who knows how to operate, and few are skilled in it.
But if you are deprived of this, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the practice of women's bladder stones, or a matronal woman who is skilled in this art, or a woman who has taken part in this art.
Therefore make that woman present, and command her to do all that you order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman's bladder is weak, then take care that you put your finger in her cleft and seek the stone.
Therefore if you find it, cut beneath your finger, and then command her to insert above it.
But if it is not weak, then command the matronal woman to insert her finger into the hollow of the patient's bladder and examine above the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and grasps it with good compression.
Therefore if you find it, then take care that gradually you extract it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts beneath with your finger's virtue until you bring it to the exit of the thigh.
And then insert above that apposition of the majesty of the hollow beneath the exit of the thigh, from which part it is to be stopped and sent the stone in that partition, and the finger of yours does not remain stuck to the stone beneath it.
And the section is small at the beginning; and then insert the radius above that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in the section according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from it.
I know that the species of rock salt are many: because among them there is little and great, lean and rough, long and round, and they have ramps.
So you know how many species of it are yours for what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vertebral location treated and keep it there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the rock salt is forgotten.
And make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments which are used in the extraction of rock salt at home, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then you stop powder on the location and remove those powders and structure descends, and do not iterate that; and leave the rock salt and do not extract it, because for a strong wound the malady will die. And then heal the wound.
So when the sharpness of the blood is calmed down, then the location will settle, and you return to your operation until the rock salt is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia and its causes.
Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white cavity which is below the codena of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called a cavity.
And some veins are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the partition of the humor, until it is seen that there is another humor; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white cavity which we have said, and it is not but bitter.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which affects the genitals, so that at those times it is founded on this matter, and some veins affect by percussion made on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is white and aguish, and it is what is most.
And the signs for which it is known on this aggregation of water are these: because if it is in the white cavity which we have said, then the apostema is red and declining a little in length, thus like the figure of humor, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in its proper panniculus, then the apostema is red and part of the humor, and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white cavity, then it falls below the sentiment.
And as you want the cognition of the color of the humidity, then you will express the color of the humidity in the apostema in the midst of the cavity, and according to what is written in the vestige of the midst, judge that it is descending from it.
So when we come to the cure of the iron wound, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the wound.
And then it is suspended above the two seats about some cause a little higher, and stop below the word drops.
And then you sit on the left part of it, and command the minister to follow on the right of it, which extends its rod from two sides to the codena of the genitals and to the partition of the miracle of the belly.
And then you take a wide spatula and separate the codena of the genitals from my place for the length until you reach the pentangular.
And it is made the section according to a straight and equal distance from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white cavity, comprising.
And you remove that, and observe, and guard yourself for thus that you do not injure it; and your removal is the one which removes by partition so that it is suspended in the humor most subtly and scrutinized in the removal according to the quantity possible for you.
And then you perforate the full cavity of water in a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then you separate between the two labia of the section with uncias, and extend the cavity to the upper parts; and do not touch the codena of the genitals comprising, and injure the cavity in that manner which is possible for you. And you injure it in its totality or in pieces, and majorly the wide seat subtly, because if you do not precisely observe the injury of it, it is not made securely that the water does not return.
Mostly the humor proceeds from that defect of its codena at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cavity, return to it, and then adjust the two labia of the codena of the genitals with a suture, and then heal it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the corrupted blood through another bad humour, then it is necessary to remove the veins that are causing suspension, and extract the blood, and then take care of what has been said.
Perhaps the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that the two are kidneys; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equalization; and if you see that it is a workable operation, then do it.
And then you will purge the blood, and enter into the narrow passages that are submerged in oil or rose oil; and pause before pouring another oil which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two genuflections and the miracle of the belly; and pause above double drapes and pulvis, and bind them above the limb which is according to this form.
And then press two drapes and fill the warm oil according to this resemblance; and fill the extremities with what is taken from a warm cloth or humid oil, and fill the structure in the belt of the breeches, and one extremity takes hold of the backside within the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the thigh, and two extremities on two hips below and two other extremities on two angles, and the entire structure is adjusted in the belt of the breeches.
And some hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the narrow passage at the iron; and it is that you take a sharp cutting cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what has been recommended until the white ciphac containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form. And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
And then pierce the ciphac, and ignite until all humidity is expelled.
And then extend the ciphac into inches, and scrape in inches, and scrape with a sharp ignited cautery; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the blood that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is more salvific and farther from blood flow, and better than an operation on the narrow passage.
Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema in the hour of narrow passage or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is known that you cure what contrariety you do for that, with a curative method that suits him according to what has been said.
Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer piercing according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is known that you make the patient sit on some elevated seat, then pierce the apostema in the lowest part of the spine with a broad flat spatula, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
And it is the wide perception until all the water corrodes.
And then pause on the warm place and bind it and leave it there, so that the remainder of the water corrodes. And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Perhaps the contrariety is at the expense of the water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for the quarrel of the white panniculus in the orrifice of the wound, which makes a contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water; then it is known that you put in the wound a painful instrument from which the water is extracted from the hydropits, in the preceding form; or adjust on the expense of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and it is augmented approximately six months or in those surroundings; and as it is added, then it is pierced according to that measured manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
On the narrow passage about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the narrow passage about this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen, its dismissal and salvation by that better way.
And you will remember the operation on that and the species of the apostemas.
Therefore, I say that the apostemas are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharpness or for percussion.
And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a severe apostema.
And often it is a lapified apostema, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel pain at all.
And some hernias are made for swelling of the arteries, and for inflammation of those also because it has not been perceived, or for inflammation of the veins.
It's more likely that the disease is caused by inflammation of the arteries, which is confirmed by the dispersal of the abscess when it bursts in those same tendons.
That which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause, but rather is compressed in the same tendons.
And it is possible that on this specific occasion a section was made on the other muscles; and it is that you incised the code of the genitales, and then you stretched out the skin to the separated parts above, and extracted the white ciphac from it, and cleared the suspensoral ligaments of the vessels, and tied them, and incised the suspensoral ligaments so that you cleared all the separated parts of the skin.
Then if the skin is already conjoined with those muscles, it's necessary that you extract the skin and incise it.
And if there is adhesion between any cause of the ciphac, or between that which is between the vessels, then it's necessary that you clear all that adhesion and incise it for a round incision.
But if there is a native growth of flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind, then it's necessary that you incise all that is of it, and extract the skin also as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then take care that it is treated with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernia that occurs in the vitals.
A vit is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult by exercise movements and walking on the affected thigh.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is by tempering for that which is preceded by remembered remedies.
However, it's necessary to say that I opposed the operation according to what the first ones did.
And I say that it's necessary to make the affected thigh rest on an elevated pillow; and then you fasten the suspensoral ligaments of the testicles to the lower parts; and then you code the genitales in the same tendons in the vessels that are probable for the hernia; and hold those other ministrations that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then you incise in the spatium latus, going through a transverse section in the right of the vessels until they discover the hidden vessels.
And then you excavate the entire affected part, just as I have said in extracting the arterial roots which are in the temples.
And then you leave it in that agulla in which there is a double thread, and tie it to the first of the places where the vit occurs, and tie another on the back of them. And then you incise those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added by the foul and corrupt humors.
And then you treat the wound with a treatment of other wounds in which you want to be healed so that the vessels may not become inflamed by one of the two genitales, because it is not bad for that.
But if vit occurs in all the vessels, then it's necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cleared of the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they are stabilized, or cleared for that so there is no growth in them.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by section that ends in the extended ciphac above the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by giving way the intestines of that rupture add to those intestines.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of excess of it, and it occurs to these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess enclosed within the belly so that the ciphac compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is by section of the ciphac, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing below the code of propdanis appearing, and that is by ulceration of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the ciphac.
And some vague matters are forgotten in the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia zirbal.
And some vague matters are made in the ventosity, and some vague matters run into the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is a great peril of the illness, and some vague matters cause bad pain and worsen when they are premature.
In the treatment of the species of this disease, I fear it is iron, because I think that the medication should be avoided in that case.
And the manner of operating on that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their own hands at the divided parts of their hernia if they obey, and then place yourself seated on a stool between their legs, and lift their legs.
And then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles at the divided parts below, and insert the cord of the testicles totally for the length; and then fix the two lips of the section with stitches according to how you need to close the section in those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly do from that, the hole may be forgotten.
And then scrape that crust which is left on the cord of the testicles, until the white hard crust is discovered from any part.
Then you have inserted the finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white crust, which is left on the cord of the hole, and between the crust, and absorb with that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
And then I place my hand on the cord of the testicles at the divided parts beforehand, and I also extend the white crust with my left hand, and lift the hole to the crust at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the hole downwards and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind in a complete solution.
And search with your fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the hard white crust. But if you find any cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly afterwards.
And then insert into the part beneath the cord of the testicles for sectioning of which runs healthy and sane blood, thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and some crusts of white crust are cauterized, which we have said then to insert the theme of flow of blood, because many administrations accede to those) and release the binding until it falls by itself.
But if the medication is delayed, then warm water should be poured, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the plague with another cure of plagues until it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of windy hernia.
In this hernia, I have not seen anything that has been hardened under the treatment of iron.
And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is in a vein; which is that you lift the vessels near the section over that which is facilitated by the environment of the abscess in that, until the vessels fall.
And heal the plague according to what we have said until it is healthy.
Chapter 67.
Of the dispersion that occurs in the ankle joints.
Some crusts of rupture occur in the ankle joints thus as we have said, and emerge from the place.
And they do not show any cause of the intestines in the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to them in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged in that, an adjusted fissure is made in the crust until it descends into the intestine in the crust; and it accedes to that for the extension of the crust which is in the ankle joints thus as we have said, which causes it because the crust is extended, and then it is softened and the place becomes abscessed and emerges.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery thus as the narration of it has preceded.
Some wounds are cured by iron in the following manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two arms, and then the area of the rupture of the apostemes is cauterized with a three-inch rod according to the quantity.
Then tighten the white clyster that is inserted into the colon so that it may be discovered.
Then take the rod and place it above the prominent area of the clyster, and apply it to the region of the belly.
Then kiss the two prominent areas on the extremity of the rod of the clyster, and adjust one of them to the suture with the other.
Then extract the extremity of the rod, and do not insert the entire clyster, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause, so that you may know how to cure an intestinal hernia.
Then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the clyster is constricted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the cod (testicles).
Some wounds on the cod (testicles) in certain men are softened by this means because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire softened cod (testicle) onto the natural cod (testicle); and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
And if you want, then at the beginning of the treatment, remove the excess of the softened cod (testicle) with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then cure by curing the other wounds until it is healed and the threads are cleared.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the science of the doctor who is expert in it knows how to cure what happens to him, and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our own improvement, such as with horses, and goats, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by making a section.
Moreover, in that which is done by attrition, the way of operating is that we make the animal drink hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be touching anymore.
Moreover, in castration done by making a section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and grasp the cod (testicles) of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensors, and insert above each hole in one section until two holes proceed.
And then insert those parts so that you will have removed whatever is excessive. And do not leave any cause on the clyster, but rather the subtle clyster which is above the veins.
And this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the cure of Hermaphrodite disease.
Hermaphrodite disease in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which occupies the space in the cod (testicles), and in that which is between two testicles, figures like a woman's flesh in which they are hairless.
And some wounds of that kind corrode the urine which is in the cod (testicles).
Moreover, in women it is a species: and it is that the flesh of the woman on the perineum is like two testicles of a man, a little smaller and hidden in the partition before like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two from men and one species from women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted flesh until it escapes the impression of that, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine is emitted, which is in the cod (testicles), there is no cure or operation on it.
Chapter 71.
The thickness and prominence of flesh are caused by women's humors.
The thickness is adjusted according to natural causes, which are restrained and made into a rule; and some veins are enlarged in some women, so much that they swell also as in men, and are felt even in the joints.
Then remove the excess of thickness from your hand or from a uncle's or other wise men's advice.
And do not delay in the incision, rather increase in the area of the root, so that no flux of blood is hindered.
And then heal that wound with care of the ulcers until it is cured.
Bad flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that, and it is said to be evacuated from the divided parts before according to the appearance of a tail (and for this reason the first doctors called it "caudal malady"); therefore, remove it so that we evacuate also like evacuating thickness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of gout.
Gout is when the bone of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to bad matter that has preceded, and it is made or caused by unadjusted flesh or subtle and thin skin.
And it is made or in the area of the mother, or in its ribs, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits from acquiring and from taking hold, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observation of the uterus, if the oppression is apparent, it is propounded; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the signs and tokens or with the radiance.
But if the oppression is due to subtle skin, and it is pushed towards the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that which pauses over the two pubic labia, and then pauses with the signs and tokens indicating both the most affected areas.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia forward so that the subtle skin is broken and the oppression is lifted.
And then take a lancet and open the skin in oil and pause that over the area, and let it stay there for a day so that the area does not consolidate.
But if the skin is thick and dense, then remove it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the oppression is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with an uncle's help, and incise it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood, such as astringents, and dragon's blood, and onions, adjusted with the white of egg.
And then administer a wide poultice of lead plaster so that the wound does not close too quickly.
And hold it for several days and administer lukewarm water of the ashes.
And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And some veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then remove them according to this manner. But if it is for cancerous apostemes, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the mother not to be made contrary with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occur in the bone of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins until they corrode blood continuously; and since they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are made into tails.
And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say also about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the area of the mother and do not appear to the sensation, then in those no cure is made with iron.
But those that are in the orifice of the mother above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
And then you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail to the forked parts, or with rough drag, and incise it at the roots.
And then powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the powdered incisions, astringents, and likewise as cassia and similar to those.
And then soften the soles of the feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and of scorched millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of ordinary quality and comfortable warmth, and I agree that you should apply a plaster to the patient's back.
If the bleeding has stopped, well and good; otherwise, apply two warm poultices, and scarify the breasts slightly.
And then take wool and soak it in juice of colic weed or juice of arnagloss or juice of guarravier, and I think you should apply it to the area; and then carefully treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat that area until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
About the accidental perforation of a hernia in the wall.
Various special types of abscesses that occur in the wall, such as cancerous and wandering apostema, and ulcerations and adherent and eroded and hemorrhaging fistulae and ragwort and thigh and other abscesses. And I have already spoken about these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
And it is fitting that I should speak about this treatise on apostema, which concerns the ones that gather in the wall when they are of the apostemas that collect together there, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of the iron is done.
Therefore, it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the apostema in its beginning is acute with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes it enlarges and if you feel upon it, then do not puncture it, and treat it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline her back against a pillow and adjust her feet to the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below the knees, and tie whatever is necessary with a convenient ligament.
And then the midwife should follow the straight path and administer the instrument with which the opening of the wall is opened, in the form of which you will find in those causes that you will do afterwards.
And it is fitting when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the radius of the wall of the woman's womb, and what of the instrument enters into the wall should not be more than the radius of the wall and the patient's evil. Perhaps if the instrument is larger than the radius of the wall, then it is fitting that you apply poultices on the texture of the radius of the wall so that the entrance of the entire instrument into the radius of the wall is prohibited.
And it is fitting that you pause the vertebral column that runs in the instrument from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until the opening of the wall is opened.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then it is fitting that you separate it from the head of the instrument with a spatula.
And when the sania is evacuated, then it is fitting that you apply on the wound a medicated oil or green oil in which there is some stipidity; and place the calcium in the section of the radius of the wall.
And apply before the wall and on the tender wool, a clean cloth submerged in water in which there are softened mallows.
And then it is treated for two days with an ointment that is convenient until it is healed.
And some vegetables are washed in the wall and the wound, thus they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in water in which there is dissolved root of iris or long aristology, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deeply rooted in the wall, then it is fitting that you are prohibited from curing it with iron, having cured it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach the midwives in what manner they should help the unborn babies that are malformed, according to an unnatural figure.
The necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expel the parts below and desire to smell the air, and about this is judged by what is above her, and fixes the seat of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the seat of it on the womb's head, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is fitting that the belly of it should be compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, as it seems to settle on the womb's head, and it is freed from those superfluous burdens with good moderation.
Perhaps that which is another part is unnatural and unlaughable, because when the embryo sits on its feet and the body of it sits before its head and its feet, and the hand of it alone, or at its foot. It is situated at the head of the patient and their hand, or at their belly, and it is strongly converted on the dry column, and resembling the unchanging figures of theirs.
It is not necessary to have a master who is wise and subtle in all those causes, and that they should guard against error and deception.
And you show the entire figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it is signified by that and stands over that.
When the fever is situated on the dry head by natural increase, and it is vehement against the woman and is made in the difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the patient is already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that the women hold the patient, and evaporate the congealed humor with fumigations and olive oil humectants.
And then insert the measuring rod between the small spaces of the spatulum, and find in it the second dimension, or dry that finger inside so that you can correct what is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman inward so that she expels the fetus.
But if she does not expel, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of ptilli and a poultice of fumigating cynamon.
And then command it to her, then crystallize it, so that it is comprehended and makes that stormy condition with consent; and close the mouth of hers and her nose for one hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
And if the two parts of the fetus are not yet fully expelled at the commencement, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with facilitation. But if it does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet above hers, and then settle the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus dies, then cut into those and extract the remainder of the fetus or take out the corpse with the hand of hers in a draught and extract that with equality, because it will be fully expelled.
When the fetus is situated on the dry feet, then it is necessary that you impel them in themselves, and then convert the small fetus, and then grasp that, and then take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
But since they are situated between the thighs, then you command it to her that she presses, and make that external effort with consent, because it will be fully expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not fully expelled in that which we have recommended, then you return the small fetus little by little into its pause according to its natural figure, because it will soon be fully expelled in an easier situation.
And if it is prohibited in all that which we have recommended, then take of a poultice of altea and dissolved gum, and strike everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then line it with the congealed humor of the woman, below the belly of hers. And then make that mixture into a warm bath, so that it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the divided parts of hers are thus lenified, then make for her a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause it to her. And when you have done the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make that stormy condition and extract the mouth of hers, and lift it from that, and press the part below the belly of hers with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be fully expelled.
The placement of the fetus laterally pending one of its hands. It is ingeniously reduced by the hand of hers, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if walking is not possible, then make her lie on the mattress, and strike her thighs with vehement concussion, and then administer gentle treatments which you have recommended for poultices.
And if the swelling has come, then make a poultice above the affected area, and apply a study on the reduction of the evil, and bend the foot according to its natural shape, and apply a bandage to the woman and command her to take it in so that it is not forgotten.
Rest the foot on expanded cushions and its surface is at the back of its mother. Because the midwife held the hand of the foot and slowly turned that small part little by little, and thus that movement was facilitated.
And when it is so engaged, and then stop on the joint of that water which we have recommended to be used for oil and poultices.
And then command it to be massaged little by little, and when you have made a poultice, then make that poultice above an affected area and command it to be inclined towards the right side, and then command it to be compressed; and make that bandage in condition. The prepared fetus lies on its side.
When the horrific pain of the mother is according to this manner, consider, and then you insert your finger into her vagina so that it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the foot is suspended above the face and neck of it, then you insert that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then you apply the foot to the divided parts within so that it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to take it in some gentle movements, and the sir will be forgotten, if God wills.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. You know that many twins are born not naturally, and some times three or four, but this is strange and harsh to understand; but I know that these are causes against nature, and it is not life.
And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those umbilical cords; some gentle movements are forgotten, thus it is a fetus for natural birth, and thus some gentle movements are non-lausable thus as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult cases of their births and they arrive at what we have said about the non-natural figures, then you cure them thus as we have reported.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and delays, and it is ingenious according to the whole figure as it is prepared by the ingenious birth for health.
Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some wounds are formed on the mother one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman who aborts gets seven, and another X is totally formed, which causes a point to be made for measuring the glorious savors.
And thus it is certain that it is in the science of the midwife that she strongly holds onto that small similarity to that, and therefore stops at that which she knows.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for the dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not before existed, and you are forced to use opposing operation on the mother, then it is certain that you consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Then it is certain that the woman should be placed on a soft bed with two pillows, and her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs should be elevated.
And the minister held that of two parts or is tied to the bed so that the body of it does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you humidify the mouth of its mother with olive oil and mucilage of marshmallow and of fenugreek and of sesame.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand into the mother, and then seeks the place where the nails are in the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be born above the soft head, and then you find the nails in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or below the beard, or in the armpit, or in the convenient places of the ribs, or below the hips.
More so if the delivery is above its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is certain that you hold the nail with your right hand, and stop the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand into the facilitated place and find the nail in some of those places which we have mentioned, until you come to the boyish cause.
And then stop and fix in the application of another uncle, or the third if it is necessary, so that it may be attracted equally, and not be extended according to its own rectitude as much as possible.
And you will heal the entire affected part, so that the swelling of it may be alleviated thus, as it is done in teeth devolving into eradication of it.
And collect in it the water that is between them so that the extension may be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then collect that the nurse united some six threads and inserted them expertly and revolved around those retained waters.
Then if the affected part of the foot is forgotten, then the uncles are permitted to enter the place where it may be pushed out; and do so inside that the entire foot may be forgotten.
But if the hand is swollen in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of it, then collect that a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it inside so that everything may be forgotten, and place it either at the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
And thus collect that you should make a similar application on the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or it tends towards contraction in the swelling, or it is at the head of the adjusted water, then collect that you should insert between the fingers spatula-like spines and divide the head and extract the water, or that you will discover with an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
And similarly do if the foot is of large head by nature: and then collect that you should insert that with alum solution, or that you take it with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is swollen and contracted towards the ankle, then be opened inside so that the humidity which is in the foot may be expelled.
But if it is not complicated, nor does it tend towards swelling, then you will insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the evacuation of the belly is apostemated or it is in the hydropic, then collect that you should perforate it inside so that the humidity which is in it may flow out.
But if the foot is above the six feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it is contracted towards the belly and foot, then collect that you should extract it with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and foot inside so that the water which is in them may flow out.
But if the other members are stagnant and turned towards the head, then the measure inserts the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert the hand in the opening of the instrument, and seek with that the head, and direct it with the fingers inside the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it an uncle, or two uncles, and direct it to those.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted due to apostemic caution lest it tends towards the humor, then collect that you should not trouble it; instead collect that you should administer effusion of humid and greasy causes. And administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humectate.
And if the foot is above the sixth rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the living foot.
And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted in pessaries, and let it be extracted.
And collect that you should not leave any cause of dentition from the secondary.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostems caused by the mother.
And if it tends towards flux of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was born dead, and then above that focus another conceived embryo, and then the fetus died again. It happened to him a long time ago an apostem in the sixth embryo; and it swelled inside so that it became pregnant, and began to grasp with a broken arm.
And I was called to his cure, and I medicated him for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Then I paused about him for some causes of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed some journeys, and extracted another bone; and I was very marvelled, as if in the belly there were no bones.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead foot.
Then I understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the six thousand disposed positions, and I had seen it in such a manner for a long time, corrected by a small arm.
And you do not need to forcefully restrain it, but rather that it is science and aid that the doctor's artificial hand is placed on the hand for curative administration.
From the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the effusion.
Form of vertebrate in which the matrix is opened:
This is the form of stretcher on which the books are placed, to which two virtues are added in both extremities of two feet. The emperor ordered this virtue to be covered, which is more subtle than a stretcher, and made of ebony or of wood from boys.
And the width of each wood is two fingers and a margin of about two fingers, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two woods there are two adjustments of that metered wood which are already fixed, whose length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it is opened in those places where you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and more lightweight:
It is made of woods of ebony or of boys according to the similarity of forceps. The emperor has them on the extremity of it with two additions like that, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the matrix, then you make the woman sit on a chair with her feet suspended, opening what is between her thighs. And then you open your hand on the instrument like that, making a grip according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix, until the meter makes it so that you want.
The form of vertebrate that the ancients described:
Form of impeller on which the effusion is propelled:
Form of amputation on which the great head is contained:
And it is assembled like a forceps on which the teeth are placed at the extremity, like that, and some veins are made long like that, according to this form, like that, on which the teeth are placed like the teeth of resection in which it is incised and contained. Form of small amputation:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are excavated, and when they are multiplied, the species of that one are prepared by the artisans, as it is lighter in its operation and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
And you do not operate with those instruments if it is not necessary, because the need for those is not excusable.
From the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is retained by the enfantement, then you command the malady to retain its sieve there, and then make that stirring in condition, and stretch your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if for that reason it is deformed, well it is.
And then, you take a cup and pierce the cover with a tube and pause in that herb opening the mouth of the matrix, like calm and rough and anet and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and then pause that over the flame.
And then you pause a cane of canaviera in the mouth of the matrix, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the matrix.
And then make that stirring as I have said, and the second one will be forgotten at velocity.
If it remains Roman, then you command the matrona to submerge her left hand in oil of sizami or in mixture of altea, and then you introduce that into the conch and quest for it, and when you find the aura, then take it and extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the matrix does not fall from the vehement attraction. Beforehand, you make sure that it is permuted to the right and left costs, facilitating.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, we have not recommended the cure in sternutation and medicine of the cup with herbs.
Mostly if you have not forgotten all the causes that we have recounted, then beware that you do not fatigue yourself over that iteration of abstraction, mostly I empower that which is issued from the mouth of the mother, and then crystallize it in an engagement and tetraformation; because that far-off will purify it for several days and it will dissolve and be forgotten.
When you purge, it is of the elevated bad air at the head, and in the stomach, and that leads to the malady; and then it is known that they are administered under fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Mostly the ancients used to treat it with fumigation of nitrite and dry figs.
Method of instrument by which the woman is fumigated below, retaining menses and secondina.
It should be made of glass or of clay.
And the subtle extremity should be placed in the cone and the broad extremity over the focus, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the focus.
And hold that in until it is consumed by that fumigation and then another will follow.
About the treatment of the unperforated navel of the infant.
Some infants are born with navels that are not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed passage. Then it is known that the midwife should perforate with her finger in that passage; and if not, she should perforate with a sharp spatula, and beware that she does not touch the liver.
And then place over that woolen cloth in wine and oil; and then cure with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mostly if you fear that it is obstructed, then pause in the treatment for a few days, and wait until the infant wants to expel.
And then there is obstruction of the navel due to consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is known that this consolidation should be incised, and then it should be cured with what we have said about the treatment and the poultice.
About the treatment of the fistulas that come from below.
The fistulas that come from below in the lower part are swollen and gross, those which come forth near the anus or in the space of one region.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that swelling is old and corroded by the putrid white humidity or subtle pyroura, and some veins are derived from these fistulas, some penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known by what is issued from them for the exit and for ventilation; and some times use the badness of exit, and often it is issued from those worms.
And some of those fistulas, some veins are derived in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
And that in which the penetrating fistula is known, entering into the anus and not-penetrating, it is that you should put your finger inside the anus, and then you should apply a subtle thread of iron or of metal in the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mostly if it is twisted, then insert into that subtle thread of lead or of horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progress in the treatment of any cause of evacuation or worm or ventilation, thus as we have said, then you should know that it is not penetrating, and then you should proceed to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the signification of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such an extent that the place where medicine is consolidated.
Mostly if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread should be inserted here if it is not twisted into the bone, and there is pain in the circuit of the region; and that sometimes it becomes putrid; and that it does not work in this medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is troublesome and vain effort of the foolish doctors about which they boast.
Mostly in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, health is iron-bound, separated according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been and proceeded.
And it is that the badness goes among your hands over the two fingers and elevates the legs of it into them, the thighs are inclined towards its belly, and then insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the twisted fistula, until you know the place where the thread passes.
And if it feels the badness around the neck, then it is known that you should insert your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel in the tendon a thin, penetrating pain, another that you feel between the tendon and the skin, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not touch there, because it is not a healthy place, just as we have said.
Perhaps emperor's doctors have said that some remedies are healthy in some people with tender skin.
And the medication through which you expect to achieve youthfulness in it is that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously described, and introduce that ignition into the fistula until it reaches around the ankle; and then proceed for two or three weeks until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated skin areas are similar to the downy plumage of a bird.
And then heal those wrapped-up ulcers in a bandage until all those adjusted skin areas are visible, and then heal with medicines that engender and consolidate the skin, and if it is healthy, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the tendon is inside, and does not penetrate into the tendon that is in the hernia, and between that and the tendon that is only a thin layer of skin or of membrane, and sometimes the fistula is in what is the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the drying of the tendon, and it will be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the tendon is seen, and for the tendon it is freed and healed.
And then cleanse those fistulated skin areas which are similar to the downy plumage of a bird and do not disturb them with any cause.
Perhaps it is twenty times that you come between you and your operation when you are healing those skin areas, then the thousandth time it will be and of the less sharp instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts well two good habits: so it is the adjustment of those adjusted skin areas, and the removal of the blood's excessive humidity.
And then heal those wrapped-up ulcers in a bandage or with three sittings until the place gets strong, and then heal the wound with a hard skin that engenders and consolidates.
And these medicines are those which are most effective and remove excess; when then it is restored, it is already healthy and does not fear relapse.
Perhaps the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the hernia and is elongated from the surface of the body, then you will find the tendon in the hernia and inquire about that.
And then you will feel the tendon and between you and it is only a thin layer of membrane or skin, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation in that case according to the way of confidence and hope.
The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you acquire the conquest of the intestine so that it is possible for you to enter into the fistula and the cure is propounded; and do not process too much with the drying so that you do not incite the contained liquid, and that you act upon the patient's sentiment of will; and then heal that which we have said because it is strong in its health; or to elongate that thin layer and remove that pus which dries until near the hernia, as we have said, either with a tendon or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated skin areas which are in the drying until one can make a crust; and then strive to make the restoration of all the wound in the drying, and if the excessive pus is not consolidated, and the hernia remains open in the part of the hernia, and it will be less sharp for the patient. And the fistulated skin areas are finished according to this method: it is when you introduce the tendon into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the hernia around the surface of the body with the codena and on the margin of the hernia, then take the tendon of perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the courses according to this form.
and introduce it into that wrapped-up ulcer of five ulcers or around those; and then introduce the tendon into the ulcer in the fistula until you acquire the conquest of the intestine.
Perhaps it is penetrating into the margin of the hernia properly inside, then you extract the ulcer from that tract as if you were introducing the tendon into the hernia; and extract the extremity of the ulcer and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when you have inserted the ulcer into the skin, strengthen well until those skin areas are inserted which are between the two extremities of the ulcer and which fall.
And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healthy.
Perhaps the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not too much in the groin, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not incite the contained liquid; and then make it until it is healthy.
The shape of the spatula-like instrument is the one that is used to make a fistula: its curved part is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that it does not insert unnecessarily, just as sometimes happens.
The stitching of hemorrhoids in which a healthy blood flow occurs at the insertion of those.
Hemorrhoids are classified into two manners, because they are either between the buttocks seeming like this that is of carbon, or those which have a fat resemblance. And of those which are small and large, and the blood flow of those is sometimes one, and it's many, and it's outside the buttocks, and in their extremities.
It is often seen that those which are outside the buttocks are according to the measure of little humidity, from which blood flows with citrus water or a small amount of blood as continuous discharge, and it's according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is next to the anus is that one commands the patient to sit down and to exert himself inward so that the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take them in your hands and suspend them in a mixture or hold them with your fingernail, and then cut them with their roots.
But if the nails are not held in them due to their humidity and softening of them, then take them with a rough cloth or a knife or a lanolin-covered thread, and extract them from their roots, and then cut them and powder over their ulcers with powdered caustic substances according to the insertion for cauterization; or cauterize them as it is previously described in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal them with another cure until they are completely healed.
And if the anus does not obey the evacuation, then crystallize the patient in crystal form in which it is slightly bitter, and wash with that water that is in the anus and it will obey the evacuation more easily when the patient evacuates.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your fingernail, or that you take them with a nail, and insert them, and then heal them with water that we have said until they are completely healed.
And he who administers the insertion, should administer the stitching of them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make that penetrate into the needle at the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread around the part beneath the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in strong structure, and then loosen the thread and extract the needle.
And make that into a totality, and let it be one of those and not be disturbed, so that the superfluity of blood flow occurs from that.
And then stop on the anus wrapped in oil rose or in wax; and stop that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let it be until it falls out; and when it is cast off, heal them with an ointment or another cure until they are completely healed.
And since they are antiquated and not valid in that medicine, then it is necessary that you root them out with the point of the spatula or with your fingernail until they are humid wounds and are held back by the scar tissue above, which prevents their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then you dig them out with a vehement root until the first way so that much blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are completely healed.
You know that piles, this is clear, and it is not so if you do not notice the redness according to the color of the body similar to a head of garlic, and it is made in the whole body and mainly in the parts beneath the feet and toes, and it ends for those who have pain from them.
And then it is necessary that it be inserted into what is in the circuit of the piles, and it be held with forceps or a nail, and it be eradicated from its root; and then heal it.
And if you wish, cauterize the second way that is previously described in the seventh chapter.
But of true warts, it is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many ways come to the hands of children.
And the cure of them is that you extend and insert them, or that you strengthen them with a thread or a hair until they fall out. And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
Most often it is a small, festering or ulcerated wound on the surface of the body that annoys much in the groin, and when it bothers there, it seems to be a sign of festering decay, and it is caused around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a small tube of oak or hazelnut, and make it strong, and place it over the wound until it contains the circle of the tube with the edges of the body; and then return your hand around the tube so that you insert what is in the circuit of the wound, and hold it in the groove of the flesh, and eradicate the decay from its roots.
And if you want, make one with a tube of iron or copper according to this method:
The lower part of the tube should be subtle, closed (not perforated), enveloped so that above the finger the grasp of it is relaxed and the rotation of it.
And if you want to cauterize the decay according to what is previously said in the chapter on cauterization of atheyl.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give crusts.
Some crusts are made of silver or gold or copper, melted or hammered; and some crusts are made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered for the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose veins are fragile or delicate, the crusts of those should be small.
The form of large and small crusts:
The head of the tube at the bottom where the purse is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance from where the purse is tied, thus sometimes.
And the extremity of it afterwards, which is inserted into the vein, should be closed (not open) much like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of the joint there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the size of the roots and the vein, even if it is a small one.
And the pouch should be where the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin are placed, and the root of it should be a palm.
And it should be perforated for many channels, thus as it is turned around; and if the space which is between the channels is large enough for the thickness of the finger.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fiber which is of twelve fibers, or around them; and adjust the pouch to it; and when it is placed in the body, it should be tightly fastened at the head of the crust between two distinct points with strong constriction, and then crust-ize each channel: The quality of crust-izing in this way is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be seated on his back, and lift his legs up to him and place one cord above it where he has homes or a lantern; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the vein to facilitate, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes out two more essences in vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crust; and then remove the crust and the patient lifts his legs up to the wall.
And if the medicine forces out that pus, it will hold as much as it can; and if he sleeps in that way for a whole night, it is more desirable in judgement.
Most often if you crust-ize it in the illnesses of dissolution of stomach and evacuation of it from the gut, then you iterate the cautery until it is healthy.
And if in the vein there are morbid or apostemated abscesses, then the crust should be subtle and lion-like, among the crusts which children are often crust-ized with.
Of the treatment of wounds.
You have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and you have spoken thus about the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the place on which they happen.
And the causes why many wounds are made thus, such as the striking of a stone, or incision of space, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a dart, or similar to those of many causes.
Most often the wounds that are in the places of the body are thus, such as a wound on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or finger, and similar to those of the limbs.
And you have recommended the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
And you should begin to treat the simple headaches of the head, because the memory of the composed remedies will come to the treatment of the third head capital.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache of the head occurs and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to a settlement of peyra or similar, and you have already trampled the codeina as much as possible, and it's a great pain and themes about that patient having a hint of apostema caution, then you should quickly cure the cephalic region; and don't delay, for extracting from the healthy part according to the quantity of its virtue, unless there's no prohibiting cause for curing, especially if the healthy part is free from the pain.
And it's the opposite of curing the affected painful part; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and coarse vices.
But if there is no prohibition from the minor affliction, then reduce the vices and do not approach flesh nor vice.
And stop on the pain, if you find an apostema caution, which is infused in oily rose oil or in wine in which it is stipulated.
But if you are certain of the apostema caution, then stop on the pain, if it is recently with holy water and the air has not moved that powder which you recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already moved that, then stop on the healing ointments until it is healed.
But if the pain is great or is due to inflammation of the space and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for poultices, then adjust them with a suture according to what you recommend for the suture of theirs.
But if the pain has already been discovered in the bones and flesh, and it's not retained by it except for a small suspensor, then you should insert that and apply curative medicine to the pain with remedies and restore the flesh in place of codena, and command the patient to be free from vices in which there is grossness: capsules and forms of coyting and similar to theirs, until it is composed.
And if you find putrid matter in the codena and it doesn't adhere to the bone, then you should insert all that purifying material and gather it, and apply curative treatment to it.
But if in these pains there is an artery or vein from which holy fluid may flow, and it's not absorbed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that non-absorbed, then you should insert that with a spatula, or ligate that; and if necessary to provoke what we have said does not concur, then you should cauterize until the holy fluid is absorbed.
And if these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; therefore you should powder over those with this powder, because consolidated that which the air has not moved.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of sesame seed one part, holy dragon's blood two parts, and unextinguished cause three parts; let all be well-triturated and crumbled, and from it the pain should be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be over that adhesive, and let it be coagulated with holy water.
And then strengthen that beneath with poultices and lift it, and do not dislodge it while it is thus, because it is not apostematized, for it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healed.
And some old woman makes that solo concoction, when it's not to your presence with holy dragon's blood and sesame seed.
And thus this medical operation is done on the great pains when it's convenient to stop on those and they are strengthened, and the recent pains with their holy water, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it's summer time, then it's not intention to apply this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, therefore you should pause on those healing ointments digested, or pause on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purification; and then cure them with the other curative treatment until they are healed.
But if you find a pain fracture in the bone, and it's small, then you extract that with gestures.
And you will direct the cure of the fractures of the head in what is coming.
Of the pains of the neck.
But if the pain occurs in the neck, then it's not different in medication, and between the pain of the head when it's simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is cut or torn, then if it's a nerve, it's not in the ingenious remedy but rather evaded curative treatment with what makes vehement stipulation, thus like zinc and zeal that it's veteran and similar to theirs because no one has seen nerves and contradicts that. And you should not pause on the pain for any total cause of all coldness, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is in the brain, which is the worst part of all members.
And if you are treating with medicinal waters, thus as the cause is washed away by double water, some infused oil in rose or non-rose, and it is washed away by double water and other minor pains are alleviated according to this manner, and they find human relief.
But if the plague is great, then administer a suture, or bind the lips together, and take care to heal that wound with poultices so that it may be healthy.
But if the plague is deep or has reached the lowest part of the purification, then pierce that in the place most prone to it.
But if the plague has cut an artery and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or ligate that, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke it to stop.
But if you have cut the tendons of the gullet or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the gullet and do not touch it; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and take care to strengthen it with a decent structure, and leave it for several days; and take care to heal it with human relief in which is stipulated and excited until it may be sanctified.
But if the plague has made a wound in the bone, then pierce that, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from it; and what you do not appreciate, leave it until the plague is purified, and it may be separated and the edge of its bone is alleviated.
And if the wound is fresh, then powder over it with the powder that you have recommended. But if the wound has made a fistula, then take care of it with water from which the reminiscence will come to you properly in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more if the wound has been ventilated when the patient was in a bad state; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with seven bloods, then you pause in it from the first hour to powder, and do not strengthen it because the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient; rather pause in it with human attraction, and remove those two veins on the day.
And if the human relief is not present to you, then pause at the orifice of the wound as much as possible so that it sucks out what is of the humidity; and make that the patient sleeps over the wound so that it runs out what is in it, adjusted.
But if the wound has passed three days or more and does not reach the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart or constriction of wing, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the wound is saved; and afterwards take care of it with warm compresses and other curative treatments until it may be healthy.
But if the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time has been spent, then you will know that a fistula has been made; take care of it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
And if the wound is by incision of a spatula or of a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then take care of it with water that precedes suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has made a price in the bone, and then you have cut through the bone's fragments, then twist the wound and gather to extract those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound is purified, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of other accidental wounds in the other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition that reaches the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introspection of them in the seventh place at once, because it swells and becomes grossly inflamed, since the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, thus as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you will know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient in sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other proper stitches communicate with the other wounds, more Empire than those proper in the stitch of the belly.
I recommend to you every explanation and declaration.
Then it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine has been found for that, and it is very difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by shrinkage of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And then when it is so, then you should scald that in this way, that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid with warm water alone, or that you cook in boiling water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
And some vegetables make it visible in which there has been stipulation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And then when the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which there are cooked altaea and malvas, because for that it is alleviated the internal instrument of the patient with little cause.
More if it is excused the internal instrument of the patient near this cure, then you should separate the disruption a little with an instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there is no occupation to occupy with necessary defeat.
Of the instrument, thus you see the shape of it:
One part of the sharp point, and the other part not acute, and the subtle extremity, and it is not in the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse by a little.
And then when the wound is enlarged and is outside the intestine, then you should ensure that its reduction is according to the form of its natural location, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better it is.
More when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus that their head may be higher; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise the head of the patient and the feet thus that the parts below may be free.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should put your attention and consideration always thus that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should administer it in large wounds and in smaller wounds.
And in small wounds, put that which is at your preparation, and make it so that the minister is between your fingers, which holds the disruption whole with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus uncover from that to whom the stitch has been made for another cause.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and thus you should lay the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the codena, with the two extremities of the ciphac which is below the codena of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have added the two extremities of the codena and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so they form four orders.
And thus you strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some vegetables from two parts together, and thus add the two lips to the wound for decent addition; and thus you lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and thus you tie it with faith as if it were the first needle; and do not cease to do so if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And thus the smaller needles are between roughness and subtlety, because the subtle needles hardly pierce the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entrance into the codena, and therefore it is necessary that they be smaller in subtlety and size.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extremities of the codena too close, so that the flesh is not pierced heavily and that the wound may heal before its consolidation.
And they are not prolonged with a suture so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation.
And thus you insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not let the patient turn over onto their sleeping side; and you will place upon the suture powders expanded from all parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles are thus more convenient in small wounds, because they have need of a suture of one needle or two or around those.
The second suture is common: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, from the codena and two extremities of the ciphal, at one time, with a needle in which there is subtle and gross envelopment.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same place from which it started, so that the thread can be pulled back with a subtle underhand movement to the wound, so that the suture is a second suture of drawn threads.
And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the small finger's mallet.
And in this suture, wise men are familiar with it.
And in this suture, I have seen a wound that was inflicted on a man in his left belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and it was the disruption of a major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine of my middle location, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have returned that deposit that the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I have cured it and it is healed; and then I have visited it for many years, and it has been converted into its proper functions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by a miracle, it was done, because I did not cure it with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment or medicine was of use, but rather I put many times two visits a day and assiduous ablutions with honey water until it was healed.
There are two special types of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the codena, and meanwhile you insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the codena and in that same moment it straightens according to the rectitude and length of the whole body, and it releases the extremity of the ciphal where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thigh.
And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another time in the same extremity of the thigh from the front part to the back part; and release the extremity of the ciphal that is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate in that your penetration, which you make penetrate into the ciphal in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of the inner thigh until all that penetrates.
And then begin from that moment and sew up the extremity that is of the ciphal on the other side, and extract the needle from the codena which penetrated, and then return it to the codena and sew up the extremity of the ciphal that is on the other side in this same extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the codena which is part of it.
And do it once and again, and do it once and then another time until you sew up all that is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew up the suture of pellicies in which you sew up the skin, also that you sew up the ciphal one time from the part of the extremity of the codena, and that you release another time until it is completed.
There is the second special type of proper suture that Gualia recommends, and this is to be done with serum of it and for its recommendation, it is that you sew up according to similarity in which you collect medicinal forces that sew up, also that they add all part to its comparable part convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
That you leave the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own part from the front, and make it penetrate to the back part in that sole, and release two extremities of the ciphal; and then return the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the ciphal.
And then return those casings, and make them penetrate certain back parts until they reach the front part in two extremities of the mirror on the opposite side that is in the contrary layer.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned remembering.
This is the serum of Gualia
And the doctors said that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from what is due to you, and make it penetrate until the other layer according to the suture of those who sew up the curves inwards.
We know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Maybe the judgment of medicine for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is because when you recently contracted the plague in the holy blood then, the air alters that and reduces the intestine and cooks it decently, then pauses over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that alkaline ointment which you have present there to make a hard and durable paste, and thus consolidate ciphers and mirrors; and then cure it in this way as is the cure of other plagues until it is sanctified.
Maybe if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that just now, because it begins to get worse quickly, and changes those two veins of the day, thus as you and teach, until it is sanctified, because you do not need another medicine in many disposed motives when the plagues are so simple.
Maybe if you fear that the plague will spread to the principal members, then cover yourself with a warm cloth of tempered quality, or with a warm ointment, and pause it in the circle of places that are between the joints and fingers.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the holy intestines, because many veins are ending there, then crystallize that bitter black powder, and majorly if the pus is generated in the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
We know that what comes from the large intestine is of lighter pus, more easily cured than what is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult cure because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive a cure of plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and due to its magnitude that is in those, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Maybe if what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your direct method with which you reduce the entangled intestines.
Maybe if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then you stretch it out over the place that is denied of it, so that veins and arteries come to flourish with healthy fluxes, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then insert what is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the vein pending on the part below the plague far from it, so that above you is alleviated the attraction of it deviating from the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the holy abdomen with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gesture and ventosity.
Therefore you should continue the cure of it since it was not confused in its sanitation, maybe you will continue to make it more subtle until it is sanctified and the place is consolidated.
And you then saw that the place was consolidated, you should take care of the patient who falls over him because of the bad accident in the holy abdomen; and do not fall for that bad accident and roam in their many disposed and mangy miles, and then enter in a bath and is exercised in his own words.
And already I described some experimented methods that when an intestine plague occurs, and it is small, then cover it according to this manner: take fragments of large caps; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a fragment of those that have the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of those and stretch its mouth, separate the cap of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another fragment for the first method, and do not cease from doing fragments until you have made one according to the quantity of the entire plague.
And then reduce it and thus the plague; and reunite those attached caps in the intestine until the intestine is sanctified; and do not harm the patient with any nuisance.
And already it is possible that the intestine is tied with subtle thread which is made from the intestine of annexed beasts, because it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it is not descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of glue, enveloping, and then insert that thread into needles and thus in that intestine, and reduce it in the rupture.
And this method of suture with fragments is not but according to the way of confidence and hope.
If the plague is great and extensive, it worsens especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not just a subtle affection, but rather a total illness.
About the treatment of ulcer and fistula.
You know that every plague and abscess, when they become inveterate and old, is an ulcer, and it's not consolidated and healed for a long time, and it's not separated, then, wherever it may be, it's universally called fistula and we call it that abyss.
And fistula, according to truth, is a hardened, tough, white node on which there is no pain and which is surrounded as if it were surrounded by a ring of pain; and for this reason, that ulcer is called "ring of pain", that is to say, pain.
And it is in a humid ulcer that gets worse; and for this reason, the humidity is separated from the ulcer in some hours. And some of these humors that have this humidity are soft, and they are few, and they are thick, and they are subtle.
Yes, and I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
And it is fitting that you know how to cure a fistula, which is done by way of surgical operation with hand.
And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that affect the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give to the proximity of the main member and similarity.
And thus among those fistulas that occur in this manner are those of difficult healing maladies, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth where you do not perceive to those places that I said, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire that hand.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that hand with a subtle point of lead, because lead in the levity of the dry body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrible matter, it is not possible for you to signify on it with your hand.
Then crystallize the horrific matter through its own horrific aspects, because the humidity by which you crystallize it goes away from the other horrific aspects and corrects them.
And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula in which there are many horrific aspects and this is on top of all your strength, with your interior fortification, in which you fortify the malady, and the invention of the pain goes away from your compression on the hand over the place, and similarly to the significations and accidental causes of the abscess.
And since you have stood upon all those causes in a steady state of truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have and said.
Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the horrific aspect of the flesh, or of the pus and similarly, and cure it within so that it may be healed.
If the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then it is fitting that you incise it in the preceding area as much as possible, and then mundify it from all its corrupted flesh; and then administer some enveloped medications acutely, and introduce them into the conquest of the fistula, which has comprehended with iron.
And if there are some evacuated matters within that acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
Then return it to its place, and restore it with those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you should inquire into that and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered by you and there is some corruption or decay in it, then you should scrape that within so that the corruption may be removed entirely; and then take care to encarnate it with what will heal it.
And if it is not healed and you see that it is thus, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover with second thoughts and exquisitely make the reason for it and the purification of it in the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
And then if it is healed, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the profound depths of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore in that case it is not generated but rather left alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you extract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
And if there are many bones, then you exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and from those do not leave any cause in your fortitude.
But if you have made opposition to any cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then you incise those ligaments or flesh thus here, and extract the bones.
But if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the plague that which will worsen the plague, and leave it until it is in the vicinity of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the plague so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have incised in your operation is constricted.
However, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone above the three-hundred-year-old oil, or the submerged bone in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green vertebrae, because when they will pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and their attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone thus like the bone of the chamber or thigh or similar to those, and what of it is corrupted is the face of it so solitary, then scrape that with resolution so solitary derrier until the darkness and corruption are removed, and then restore the plague.
But if what of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and totally incise into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you endeavour to bring it to a man in his thigh for he pauses and exemplifies and assists over your operation.
There is a young man of around thirty years, to whom there occurs pain in his thigh, and from the divided parts the worse is on the matter that divides the body until the matter pervades the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess in a great abscess, and I do not find the extrinsic cause.
And then I extend the time to that error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and I correct the matter of the putrid matters, and its cure is then paused until the thigh is fistulated, and they are in the motile orifices which all got purified and the humors of the body.
And then the multitude of doctors cured him around two years, and I did not find in those wise men anything but skill in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the matters that flowed from him through those orifices for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of him was citrine.
And then I introduced the probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe to the bone.
And then I probed and scrutinized all the orifices and thoroughly examined those that were coming from all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I thoroughly examined that corrupted thing, and it was already broken and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the thigh until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I cleared away what was discovered by me and prepared the bone that was discovered.
And you should examine whether there is not corruption in the bone which is absorbing and separating, and you have already had a prolonged illness.
Then cease the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then you should investigate and uncover the bone again according to the primary discovery, and attribute continuous corruption in the bone.
And I seem to attribute that to me from that corruption, and then you should make a perforation to do the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then you discover it on the other side and do not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you incise around an inch of it, and that extract its marrow, and then you restore it with those medicines, and it is consolidated completely and healthy.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it except for the disposition of its fragility and for the paucity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens in all hours to superfluous evacuation synchronizing with bad malady.
And therefore health is through entire sanitation, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; it is made good the disposition of it in the healthy body and returns its virtue; and it is converted into its dispositions and does not make contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
Perhaps it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already traumatized, then it is necessary that you section it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command to someone that they extend that to their own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the divided parts below, and you discover the flesh above the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And pause or place a table below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw so that it does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces a sawing from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, before it is one continued part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then pause below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its generation.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp that, and mend that according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and in case something is generated, it may be rectified by you, when it does not make contradiction or harm to you.
And you know what incisions and saws are to be made on these bones, according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare a whole species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
And you know that this operation means to you about the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long and connoisseurship of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, because then you have them for your metrics so that it is convenient for all maladies.
And you will then form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simple as those which proceed to your prohibition which you will experience over the others. Form of sawing:
Form of another sawing:
Form of another large sawing:
Form of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not suitable unless you have that rasp confected with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of a minor razor:
Form of a lateral abscess:
Form of a wound that is properly opened: it is opened in an arc shape above the pus, and the member of the boy's thigh descends properly. Type of it:
Form of a abscess in which it has formed a cavity:
Form of a subtle abscess otherwise:
Form of another abscess of the curved extremity:
Form of a small abscess resembling a tent:
Form of a smaller incision:
Form of another incision; this one resembles a line, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a line that converges to a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of sharp point.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly it covers all the causes that we have said about abscesses and incisions and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
The extremities become putrid either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it covers that you incise that member within that which has absorbed the corruption, so that the malady escapes through that of death or of evil which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member becomes black within before it is judged that fire has already consumed it, or it becomes gangrenous near the blackness until the gangrene spreads into that member which is his and which takes all the body; and therefore you should not hesitate to make an incision of that one.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption from percussion of certain venomous causes, such as of sea scorpion or of viper or of rhutella and of similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not spread into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you incise at the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm of the arm.
And if it worsens, then you incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly it happens to the foot when corruption worsens in the toe of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nostrils.
And if it takes hold in the edge of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. But if it spreads into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already spread above the ankle, then in that case it is not possible to do anything except to dismiss, and to leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch one ligament in the part where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is fully discovered; and then it is properly incised or sawed.
And it covers that one should place a cloth of linen on all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and aposteme is cautious.
But if it happens that there is a flow of blood when operating, then you cauterize the touched area carefully, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the injured member with a ligament at a convenient time, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his own foot, this same accident which I and you have recommended, which is because of the blackness in his own foot with the adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
And that corruption happens primarily in his own toe until it reaches the entire foot.
And then that man prepares himself for he has seen the cure coming to his member with the vehemence of what has been robbed of pain and of adjustment of it, and he incises that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
Long ago it happened to him that same corruption in the finger of his hand indicated.
And then I came to myself, and I thoroughly examined the excessive abundance that I had put on my hand according to the art of medicine, and it is not a reflection of the excessive abundance, but rather it begins to be absorbed into the other direction within me.
And I applied myself to insert my hand into it, and you do not want to do anything that would thwart the reflection of that excessive abundance, and perhaps it will happen that I will get a glimpse of the insertion of the dead patient's hand, because the truth of the disease was above all.
And since he disappeared from me, he returned to his own land and it became clear to me that the man prepared and inserted his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding what is written about this disease, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
About the treatment of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When abscesses occur in carnous members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of sania, and then it breaks and perforates, and it evacuates the sania, and returns to the place where it was before, like a vessel, and the code that is above it as a subtle drainage, and it does not perceive any further corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Perhaps however if the space is prolonged until corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to insert the entire code thus as it is revolving, and mainly when it is subtly drained and made into a subtle drainage, and it makes sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Perhaps if you suspect that the code adheres and that the corruption has not been achieved through further consequence, and in the code there has been a passage of time, then you should treat it with a clusters.
And it is that I consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then clusterize that limb with Egyptian medicine, which is made of oil and wine and juniper, and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes red and penetrates to the specific part of the honey.
And then you take of it what is necessary and dissolves the limb in water and honey; and clusterize the limb on that sinus, and strengthen its orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that limb with precision; and do it for so many days until the sinus is clarified and the pus is removed.
And some vegetables are clusterized in water of cinder, when it is not present to you this medicine; and it is that you take the cinder of vitriol, and put it over the water; and then cook that and clusterize that limb until you confide that the sinus is then closed.
And if the disease does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of cinder, then clusterize that limb with water and honey and mix juniper thrice, and clusterize that limb with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes adhere to the sinus, and mainly when in the wine there has been an excess of spiciness and dryness.
And when you do this with some vegetables and you confide that the sinus is already removed, then clusterize that limb with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of the dyaphonic ointment and dissolve that limb in oil of rose and wine with spiciness; or that you clusterize that limb with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is strait in which the canal of the clusterization has not been received, then you amplify that limb little by little, and pause in the water enveloped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is ample, then you add the lips of that limb to suture and leave a quantity of it in which the clusterization is added.
And if the orifice of it from which the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus below the place where it is in the arm, because when the arm is constricted at the proximity of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus until the environment of the pus below according to your will, then you should prepare the limb with preparation for which the arm flows more lightly according to what is apparent to you and that no cause of the arm is retained in it.
Perhaps that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which remains there for an entire hour so that it adjusts to what is just on the patient's arm. And in order to know if what flows from the patient's arm is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
And thus you should consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is poured over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or it has proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the veins.
Perhaps from the sinus you remove a subtle virus, then do not despair of their adhesion, because the healing of the patient is promoted, because some homes are in those which slow down the generation of flesh in those plague wounds, and of those that are done in those which make the opposite of it.
And if from the sinus you remove many days' worth of indigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like veins with dyaphoresis, when there is excessive superfluity of additive zeal.
And the last doctor who cured him is one who took veins with dyaphoresis and dissolved them in rose oil, and placed them on the patient's wounds, which are against their substance, and thus comforted that patient, and used it on him.
And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, veins with dyaphoresis, but rather it is gathered inside so that it is absorbed, and used on him; or that you take mirror and aloes and essences, and grind everything and pulverize over the honey which is on the focus, and thus line up above the cloth and strengthen that above the sinus; and thus that patient who has gathered inside so that it is absorbed, and pulverize above the cloth and strengthen that.
And some veiled ones are administered to him in long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simple or adjusted, grind them and crush and pulverize over the honey which he recommends; and thus use it on him.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the patient's chest, and thus you make inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure him with a fistular cure, just as it has been said before.
Of the cure of painful joints and worn-out nails and incisions of toes added to the section.
Painful joints are an abscess that often develops under the nail of the hand or foot, and it often occurs in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less expected, or it is abscessed by a hot abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws an arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts the whole thing, and it pervades its corruption to the bone inside so that it gives off a fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color becomes darkish.
And so when you have that patient who has been mentioned in the division and does not conform to your cure, then it is necessary that you remove all the superfluity that remains from the nail and cauterize the wound properly, because the cautery is not useful in this way.
Perhaps the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail wounds are already comprehending the flesh in the divided parts, and they begin to sting and thus that, then it is necessary that you place a subtle ray under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and they impel that beneath and remove that flesh to facilitate, and pause on what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn inward so that it is totally removed; and thus cure that patient who has veins inward so that it is healed.
Perhaps the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary that you remove the bone and extract it, because at no time will it be healed if the corrupted bone remains.
And if the corrosion and corruption are in the finger, then you remove it from one of the nostrils according to its prescribed memory, and thus cure that patient so that it is healed.
If the nail is deeply embedded or bruised, and deeply in that violent pain, then it is evident that you should start to release the patient's blood through a transverse incision below the nail, and be careful not to let the incision penetrate into the flesh that is underneath the nail, because you would aggravate the patient's violent pain, and it would cause an excessive growth of superfluous flesh at the site; and then heal that area with water that stops the pain.
However, this is adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, because they are entirely fleshy, and entirely so in their bones, or entirely so in their nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in the nodes of the finger does not do harm, and this which is born in the joints is entirely swollen.
And of those that are fleshy, the incision is easier, and it is that you should cut away the flesh around the root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscess.
But in that which is born in the fingers with nodes, it is evident that you should cut away the flesh at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then close with one of those suitable sutures convenient to water, and then heal that within so it may be healthy.
But consolidation occurs when the fingers are stuck together between their joints, either by birth of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similarity; therefore it is evident that you should release that consolidation so the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between the sheets of the swollen veins with oil rosated so they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead plate so that it may be consolidated according to what is evident.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in the nodes of the fingers on the palm, then you release that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of veins, they are varied.
Veins are varied, and they are enveloped by thick, full superfluous melancholic fluids which come from the members of the body, and their major occurrence is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore it is evident that you should administer purification of the body from black bile with some evacuated veins strongly, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of their iron is in two ways: one is that it should be cut and the black blood should be attracted, and the other way is that the vein should be elevated and all of it should be extracted.
The incision of it is in this way: at the beginning of the leg with warm water pouring much into it so that the thick blood may be resolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, and then strengthen the patient's leg at the upper part above the thigh towards the lower part beneath the knee in a bandage, and then incise the vein in one place, or two, or three with ample incision, and then elevate the black blood in its own tube from the lower part of the leg upwards, and from below upwards, so that the quantity of blood you wish may be removed, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
And then bind it, and command it to abstain from the food that generates black bile.
And repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and the patient does not feel well.
But the elevation of them is in this way: you raise the patient's leg, if it has many sores, and then put it in a bath and pour warm water into it until it becomes warm and the veins are extremely full; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if the bath is not present at your location, until the limb is scaled.
And then you should cut the skin at the right of the vein for incision in the loin or in the back of it beneath the knee, or at the lowest part of it beneath the ankle.
And then uncover the skin with an incision and excavate the vein from every part until it appears to the sense, and it is of the appearance that sometimes that roughness declines to blackness.
And then when you evacuate and from the skin, you see that whiteness which should be a cord.
And then you put beneath that vein until it is elevated and freed from the skin, and suspend it in an onion or a lion's claw.
And then you should cut another incision and then that incision for three fingers, and then excavate the skin from the part beneath the vein until it appears.
And then you elevate it and cut into the back incision of the ankle, and then extract it and elevate it until it is removed through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision that is above it.
And if you extract that from the section which is above all others or above all sections, then everything will be discharged; and then you will insert it.
And if you are unable to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it, or introduce the instrument and turn your hand to extract everything from the affected part. And beware that it is not lacerated; for if it is torn, it will be difficult to elevate the affected limb and it will come back over the patient because of that injury.
And when the entire wound is exposed, then apply to the place of the clean ulcer a mixture of oil and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is constricted having twisted to the part that is involved, and it does not follow the rectitude as we have said, then you should confine yourself to the entire twisted part of it and the places of its involvement, and afterwards suspend it in uncleanness until it elevates the entire thing.
And beware that your section does not cut the vein and does not harm it, for it will be difficult to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
The form of the incision is such that life is sectioned:
It is not to the one who is accustomed thus with unciform incisions nor of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having excess grossness thus as we have said.
Of the extraction of the femoral vein.
This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just like Atigi in Arabic lands and in Indian dry and arid lands of little tenderness, where there are no herbs nor trees.
And it is generated strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And the gesture of it is of putrefaction that you see below the gut, just as venom is infused into the body through serpents and worms and scarabs and worms generating between the gut and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of its advent is of this vein that causes inflammation vehemently in the leg; and then the place becomes vesicated; and then the vein starts to issue from the place of that vesication, which seems to be a root of plant.
And then it appears from there to the extremity, then you cover with a piece of lead of which is the weight of one drachm, up to two drachms, and mark that and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
And as many times as the evil humors of that certain cause are present in the affected parts beforehand, envelop them in lead and fix it. And if the motion is prolonged, then you section a part of it and envelop the remainder; and do not section that root until it is fully discharged, for if you section it, it is constricted and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and putrefaction in the place and bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is fully discharged from the back of it and no remainder of any cause remains in the body.
And of this vein it is said that some men who are in their longevity of 5 palms and of digits, and already I have reached 20 palms.
And if it is lacerated at the time of its medication, then introduce the instrument into the channel of it and perforate that long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and afterwards cure it by curing apostemas.
And this vein has many evil roots, and it is especially painful when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its very painful roots, and it is said that some people have a certain painful root.
And so cure it thus as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease, because many evil humors are born from the flesh and it is a worm that is born between the gut and the flesh, and goes through all the body, weakening and debilitating, and it shows the sentiment of dismembering the gut and going forth.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of certain humors, thus producing worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the whiteness, then it breeds in it and enters and destroys the whiteness, and generates many evil humors.
And then when you want to cure that and remove it, then do not do so if you do not have the skillful walking and application of it to the sentiment, and thus know that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it in the binding and constriction, and then dry above it and extract that.
And if it is deeply rooted in the flesh and does not retreat, then you stop cautery fire on the spot until it dies, and the main reason it is tempered is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the spot as we have said.
Perhaps you have sometimes seen that essence penetrating to the head of the vein, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then dry above it, and extract that; and know that the patient uses for evacuation of the bad putrid humors of their body, and beware of generating corrupting matters.
About the treatment of bad temperament.
This illness is named "nafir" in our land, and it is pain which occurs in some members, and then it spreads from member to member.
And you have already seen that symptom which I recommend to you. You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it was rubbed for an hour, you saw that inflammation going away just as the swelling went down, but more slowly than it should be, so it seemed like silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain settled in that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and then you stayed there for an hour.
And then you ran to the other side of the body until you reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the entire body according to the symptom you saw; and it was too marvellous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And you had already seen that beforehand in my writings according to that method, however you have not seen many of the things that are retreated with pain being transferred from member to member. But I did not see it in the writings as it was in the woman.
And you did not think it was that except that it is for that reason the woman was of vile, old body and discovered veins, and in this appearance the sentiment reveals that transferred windiness.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-gradation in those who are delicate and have bodies with humid veins which are weakened.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the writing as we have said, then strengthen above it and let it dry slowly over there until that constricted windiness is released, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it in the usual writings, then you cure it by excision of the body and with that which expels windiness, and burn those foul pills and serpent-like pills.
On the extraction of bloodshots.
Bloodshots are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur, because their diversity is that of those which have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and dirty ones, so they are solid; and of those which have three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with astellas.
And of the signs of the bloodshot is when you cut into it, and it pierces the bone, and it is situated under the siphac which is above the brain, because it accelerates with vehement soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the writings, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the speech is abolished and the voice is destroyed, and it is situated under the place of the wound with white humid blisters resembling pustules, and you see of those similars to the corrupted flesh.
And then if you appear with these signs, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the bloodshot, unless it is not outside.
But the signs of the bloodshot when it occurs in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and feels like it is fixed by a hard cause, and not a vague cause; and for this reason the movement of the bloodshot is similar to the movement of the pulse, and it corrodes with black wound, and it is that coldness of the extremities, and fainting, and syncopy; and then you know that death descends from all sides.
And when the blood vessels are affected by the plague that has inflamed the lung and is producing bloody spittle, and the veins that are close to the collarbone are swollen, and the color of the patient's face is changed, and they exhale a great deal of spirit, and demand urgent attention for fresh air.
And if the plague is caught in the wrapping of the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes great and vehement pain and anxiety, and does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if the plague is caught in the stomach, then it makes the eyes of the patient suffer from some indigestion of the putrid matter.
And if the plague is caught in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, some fissure of the plague opens, or the fabric, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for a cure by extracting the plague.
And if the plague is caught in the bladder, and it blocks the flow of urine, and it creates some cause for the parts beforehand, and then there is great pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Maybe the other members also, such as the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjutants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similar parts, are saved according to the major dispositions when the plague does not obstruct a vein or artery and is not a venomous plague.
And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these plagues, so that they signify to you about the cure you need.
This is the cause, because when plague settles in the lacrimal duct of the eye in the root of the nose, and you extract it from one part to another, leaving the grayness of the aurelia, and it is healed, and does not occur again in the eye of the patient.
And I extracted another plague from a Jew whose plague settled in his eye in the grayness of his own eye, behind the eyelid and also the plague was hidden and could not be achieved by that except for a small extremity that adhered to his own fist, and it was a great plague among the sharp plagues of the Turks, which iron leon did not have aurelias.
And the Jew was healed, and there was no bad accident in his own eye.
And I extracted another plague from a Christian whose plague was caught in the gullet, and it was an Arabic plague, and that is the one to which aurelias are applied; and then you inserted two guide rods over that, and it was submerged in the gullet of his; and then you subtly manipulated it, and thus I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another plague from a man whose plague was caught in his own abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, after forty days had passed and it did not move on him for any of its dispositions, I inserted into the plague and engaged with it, and he was healed, and there was no bad accident to him.
And I saw a man in whom a plague settled on his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and because he received proper treatment for seven years, the plague was rooted in the cavity of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom a plague settled in her own abdomen, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not move according to its dispositions, and the woman did not obstruct any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom a plague settled on his face and the plague was consolidated, and it broke out, not causing much pain, and many similarities to these plagues.
And I extracted the plague from the man of the princes of the king that was caught in the middle part of his own nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole plague was hidden.
And I was called to cure him by removing the plague within three days.
And then I strongly grasped the plague of the plague very tightly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little beneath the aurelia on the right, and then I expected that the little puncture was for the extremity of the plague.
And I applied the plaster to the place where it was attractive and digestive, trusting that the place would become apostemated so that it appears to me as the place of the plague, so that it succeeds over it.
And there was no significant accident in the place where the plague had achieved that location; and I continued to apply the plaster over it for many days and there was no accident; and the plague was consolidated meanwhile, and the patient's bad humor was removed from him within a space of many days until one day I felt the plague inside his own nose and recognized it as mine.
And then I paused over the acute corrosive medicine plague for many days until it became open, and with the probe I tested that, and grasped the extremity of the plague subtly, which adhered to his own fist.
And you should adjust the application of the poultice to the affected area with that acute medicine so that it appears visibly to me on the extremity of the arrow, and I will not delay for a period of time within four months.
And you should then apply the poultice, and it is possible to insert the forked instrument into it, and remain there, and do not obstruct the examination, then you will not cease to subtly feel and ingeniously investigate on that manner of ingenious devices, until a day arrives when you begin to ponder those ingenious devices, pending you descend with forceps, according to the form of those in the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the poultice.
And some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you will restore it and the wound is consolidated, and it is healthy because of complete healing, and there is no longer any problem in it for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which pauses give rule and significance about that which has not been said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend it freely.
And the skilled artisans know how to compare little about motion; and they are aware of what is present about that which is absent; and they perform a new operation with a new instrument, which descends from the extrinsic causes of the art when it accelerates.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forcibly removed from the members in which they are fixed, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where it enters; or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is removed through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is attracted and forcibly removed.
And if you do not obstruct the examination of the time when it befalls, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh which is around it can putrefy, and thus alleviate the attraction of it and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obstruct the examination, then leave it for some days and try to attract it with motion on any day, and already it will be forcibly removed.
And if you do not obstruct the examination for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
Moreover if the arrow is already embedded in the place of the body, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you inquire into that tenderly, and if you feel it, then you attract it with some instruments which are convenient for the attraction of it.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the forearm, and here there are no bones nor nerves nor veins, then you feel over the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have the golden rules which are held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire part with all the genius that you can do; and ingeniously work on that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it is obstructed.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly work with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
And if you cannot operate on that at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts which are in its circuit can putrefy, and then try to extract it because then it will be alleviated. Moreover if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in the previous chapter.
And guard your virtue of inscizione of vein or of nerves, or of cord, and administer genius in all manner possible for the evasion of the arrow; and make it facilitated and tranquil and tardy and firm thus as I have recommended.
And then you should contrast the wound by following the shape of the patient, according to which figure the doctor makes the alignment of the wound on them, because it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the wounds that are forgotten for the opposite part of the other party, or that have already proceeded to some part outside, or have made the extremity of the wound prominent by sentiment of the party above the codena propenda and sometimes that eminent; then you section above it; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you attract it, because it is made lighter by experience.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to the contrariety until the wound takes hold in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract it.
And afterwards, leave that for some days, and then iterate it until you find ease.
And if the pus of the wound is in that, then you press out that matter from it.
But if the pus is evacuated and you want to administer an impulse, then you introduce it, if it is dull, stir with a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the wound in the hollow of the wound and then press out that matter from it.
But if the wound is concave, then you press out that matter with a strong instrument entering into it, because the wound is alleviated by that.
And if the wound is infected, then it is necessary that you excavate all the flesh in which it is true, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with what is convenient.
And if the wound catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to section above it, then section above it and guard yourself from incision of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then cure the plague if it is indignant, and heal it until it is healthy.
The way to use forceps is that which attracts the wounds:
Like the extremities of birds with a beak like an eagle that are made sharp when they take hold of the wound so that they do not leave it.
And of those are made many special knots, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the wound and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of its constriction.
like a ray, so that it alleviates the instrument in the concave wound and is pressed out with that.
About phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, which ones usually customarily phlebotomize thus... of those that are in the head, 16. there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they say alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and  these are the veins that are called algelic ; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus: because among those is a cephalic, and it is of the wild basilica; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic jugular, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and funiculus of the arm, and it is placed above the forearm, and it is that which appears above the thumb for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the auricular finger and the smallest finger, and thus in the two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the knee of the wild basilica; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic jugular; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild basilica; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is for ancient and migrating, ulcerated, and catarrhal matters of the bad old head.
And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you have recommended to you: it is that you should shave the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient on the occiput in the area where both veins are ample and good friction; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage entering between the two eyes and the areas around them, near the ears, at the two points where they protrude from the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said place, and if you sense the pulse of those in the said place, here is the sign.
Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the hollow of the knee so that the flow of blood comes out. And then lift your hand on the vein and knee to the upper parts and incidentally insert the vein at the incident point. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strengthen the pulses and let it be so, until it is healed.
And already preceding in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cauterization.
More of the two arterial veins that are at the temples, the treatment of phlebotomy is for ancient and worn-out, evil, and persistent eye diseases and body full of acute overflowing fluids.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you have recommended to you: constrict the patient's seat with a bandage until the two veins appear at the manifest sentiment and perception, and then demonstrate the pulse of those in the said place; and then you will sense it.
And then you lift the knee above the vein to the upper parts in the said place indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein upwards; and insert it thus as you have done on the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause for an hour on the vein, and then pause over that joint and pulses and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and let it be so until it is healed.
And already the reminiscence of them has preceded, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is for the phlebotomy of the cephalic veins in ancient facial diseases and migrating, rough, and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; so it is that the patient strengthens their seat with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, of which this is the form.
Pause at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and percuss over it with a pin or another instrument in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
And some veins are opened in phlebotomy later, however it is not covered that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of the lazy extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly adheres to the vein in the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
More of the treatment of the two veins that are as lacrimal veins of two eyes for scabies of the eyes due to roughness and fetid discharge in the eyes, and for facial diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand steady over the head of it.
And make the phlebotomy according to the transverse at a length of a little while phlebotomizing a little, because in the place it is not flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly adheres the extremity of it, which is torn.
And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause over that joint, and strengthen it for one night, and then release it.
More of the phlebotomy of the vein on the nose is convenient for acute fever and strong sweat, and for facial diseases and migrating roughness that occurs in the face, and especially when it is ancient.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient strengthens their seat and then you place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle phlebotomy instrument long and fix it in the middle place on the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at the sentiment here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Look that you apply your hand in small touches on the little flebotomy and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it there for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
Maybe the juice of the flebotomy on the two guiding guidelines to constrict and begin with the leprosy and to extinguish evil ulcers and corrosive wounds, thus also with herpes.
And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the patient strengthens below each one in the hollow column with a ligament; and it is fixed above the head of the patient, and the patient sits upon a seat.
And then flebotomize the vein at the long distance with small touches on the little flebotomy; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, and make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the ligament and strengthen the two veins with a mild structure so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and lay him down at night because the wound is healed.
And the juice of the flebotomy on the Algerich veins, which brings forth small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and to evil ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that you make the patient cease within you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then revolve his lips and regard the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and it is more because in the circle of those small black veins; and then you will inscribe each one for an incidental inscription.
Perhaps you have doubts below you, and you don't know which one is of those, then you will make an incision on the larger one of those, and of the most evident part of those.
And make it similar to the two veins that are in the lips above.
Perhaps from the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is then the flebotomy of the cephalic to precocious ones that are in the gullet, to the affliction of the uvula, and to afflictions of the mouth.
And the quality of flebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your hands within the sun, and raise his tongue, and regard below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And then flebotomize each one; and beware that you do not apply your hand in flebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are flebotomized in the body are those which usually correct in all the homes, and the flebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either they put in the flebotomy mirror-like or olive-green subtlety declining; or they dissect with a cutellar flebotomy, and apply it with gentleness, and this is their form.
It is the side of it also as times, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding with apparent grossness, and to those that contain thick blood in turmoil.
And this flebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to a flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Perhaps the juice of the flebotomy on the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the afflictions that are below the gullet and the neck, and of what dries the feet and the belly.
And it converges to the flebotomizer, when he flebotomizes that one, that he should beware of that and be above-trembling in that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so that he knows that he does not flebotomize with a pungent flebotomy, unless he is sectant with gentleness.
And if the basilica does not appear for manifest appearance, then you know that you should leave it and move to another, or seek some other ramification; or you flebotomize at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and dissect it with a gentle flebotomy, just as we have said.
Perhaps you want the flebotomy of the metacarpal, then you know that within the structure of the arm that you touch the place until you know the place of the pulses, and then put a sign above it with a tender hand; and then leave the arm and dissect the vein in a concave section with a gentle flebotomy, just as we have said; and beware that you make a percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you massage, with strong stretches the ligament, it swells in the area that has been injured recently, then that swelling is an arterial inflammation, and therefore it is necessary to evacuate that.
And if the blood flows into the foot's veins like in the auricle of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood; and then you touch and pause the finger placed on that spot for a long space; and afterwards you remove the finger, and if the blood is absent, because many evacuated bloods are absent, then you stretch the arm and release it.
And observe the patient's condition of their motion, and be above all afraid of it and do not touch it for several days until it is healthy.
But if the blood does not disappear, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for this, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is absent; or take a thread of floss, and finish with that, and take one vein and stretch it over the area of the vein at the strictest point of the ligament and pulvils until another day.
And then if the blood is absent, it is good; and if not, then cure that wound with the remedy which is preceded by the remembrance of the place of the powdered abscesses to stop the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But the dark vein in the foot's venous network is juvenated so that it extracts the blood from the lower part of the head and to the lower part of the body; therefore because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And beware of the foot's venous network that is above all feared in the foot's venous network of it, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust on the punctuation of the foot and touch the nerve, it will happen to him stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and far from being completely healthy, And this nerve many evacuated appears at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the foot's venous network with which you foot-vein-networks in section of alleviation, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you divide the vein in length.
The juvenation of the foot's venous network of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and conveys it to the illnesses of the veins.
And beware in this property, if you want the foot-vein-networks to sprout on the olive foot-vein-network or on the myrtle foot-vein-network; because it is the safest of all the veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve.
But emperor, it is far from being completely healed in several hours, when it is not foot-vein-networked in the first percussion, but rather does not touch that aposteme.
The first of it is that you beware that the foot's venous network is not administered except in conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution of the occurrence of illnesses, and that it be done foot-vein-networking on one of the veins that are in the group, so it is: cephalic, dark, and basilica; and that it be done foot-vein-networking at the beginning of spring, above all in spring and autumn, and in winter apropos the consumption, when apparent signs of replenishment.
And it is done foot-vein-networking on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed since the morning sun.
But foot-vein-networking that is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity at any time, or of night or of day, in every hour and in every time.
And beware that if it is not foot-vein-networked until they are 24 years old, and a woman who is not foot-vein-networked except for the fourth month within seven, and the veins which have not been foot-vein-networked since they passed 60 years.
And since some people want to be foot-vein-networked for certain manias, beware that you mondify the six veins within the foot's venous network in the cluster of Leon, if in those there has been much retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluities in the foot's venous network of the veins, which are purified, and do not nourish the principal members.
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation: And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
And here is the translation:
If there is a dark or greenish discoloration in the urine, do not be alarmed; and if you want to, pause over that cause of retention or mirroring dissolution, or some cause of sugary urine or calming balm or similar remedy.
Many vigorous and accidental abscesses emerge from the excellence of the botanical flea-powder of the basil.
And then place your hand over that, and if then you feel a softness of the compression on that, then that excellence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you pause over that cause of that which we have said, because it strongly flows from the arterial sanctity.
And make an emplaster in that which is stipulated, so that the place be hardened, and then cure that wound with another cure within, so that it be sanctified.
And take out from the blood a quantity of his virtue according to the amount of his strength and according to the venturing color that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow out so that it be red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it flow out so that it be subtle; and similarly if it is agitated, until the acuity of it be stopped.
And take care that he who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in a vein, that the excellence of the vein be amplified and the flebotomy be broad.
And in one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and take care to extract it in gentle ways, and that the trachea be straight.
And the best way to administer in flebotomy of a vein is that it be cross-sectional, not a puncture.
And this manner of flebotomy is safe from flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than flebotomy according to width and length.
And to the one who is accustomed to come into syncopy from the flebotomy, and take care that you cure it immediately after the flebotomy with a small infusion of milk or simple oximel scalded; and extract the blood in three gentle ways or four.
And if it is of a complex composition, then take beforehand the flebotomy to infuse in a mixture of mirroring or in a mixture of aromatic mel infused with special spices, thus as with pepper, caneal, ginger and similarly, or in a mixture aromatized and very odorant.
And if it happens to come into syncopy from the flebotomy, and it is a cause of much blood issuance, then take care that you take in drinking warm water of carnation and a mixture very odorant and subtle; and use aromaticity with some galen, and it be limited to the few feet in that.
And use one of the other causes that we have said in the division on the chapter of syncopy for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood and dissolve the bad blood in a second way, take care of the one for whom the flebotomy is for much evacuation, and the strength of it is weak, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the strength in the continuing days.
However, whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood, and remove the bad blood in a second vein, and the body is strong, then do it around seven hours or nine of the first flebotomy.
However, whoever wants to attract the blood from the bad body to the opposite of the part where it declines, take care that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
However, that body in which there is much blood already scalded and it is acute and makes fever, take care that it be removed from the blood in one way and it be of great quantity and the perception be amplified until it comes to syncopy, since you have conserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse of the body's blood, so that no death occurs in the place of syncopy, because many ways are deadly when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not take care when you want to unblock the arm and evacuate the blood in a second way, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult to issue the blood, that you press underneath with vehemence and incurve, because this is too bad.
Having let it be until it is flebotomized secondly; or remain with the acuity of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that of tyriaca alfarrach, or of sagzenea, and compress it with a gentle pressure until the blood be outside and flow.
And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation be settled.
And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood secondly, and there is no excuse, then you bleed from that place or in another arm in another vein.
The vein called "arm vein" is blocked in the place of the fork or of the basilica, when it is not constricted or compressed, because it is composed of those.
The quality of the blockage of it is that the patient inserts their hand in hot water up to the point where the finger joints become inflamed and the vein appears manifestly.
And then stretch it strongly over that limb in a straight manner; and then block it according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor longitudinally.
And let the perception be wide and let your blockage be such that you block it above the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are exempt from iterating the hand in hot water, and it is better to pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter time.
And the blockage of this vein is more salvaged than all the other veins, because then it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the blockage of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of the blockage of it is that you strengthen the hand in a straight manner or with your own hand, because you have put it in hot water, until the vein becomes inflamed and is clearly demonstrated to the judgment; and then block it transversely; and if you insert it into the whole, it will not make sense to remove it again.
And beware that you do not ultimate your hand in the blockage, because then it has denuded nerves of digits.
And then iterate the hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly be careful that you do not make a straight cut in all parts.
But the youthful assistance of the blockage of that vein of the left hand is that it is convenient for the illnesses of the spleen.
And do similarly in the blockage of it, as you have done in the other.
And the youthful assistance of the cephalic vein of the blockage is for the illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, as well as the illnesses of the matrix, and for the retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs anciently, and for their similar illnesses.
And the quality of the blockage of it is that the patient inserts their foot in hot water and makes friction on that place until the veins appear; and let it be on the joint of the foot in a circular manner; and the place of the vein has a apparent talon which gives off the little toes, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot with many roots.
And then block the vein more amply around the leg, giving off the talon, and its aggregation, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you block it on the face of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below there on the face of the foot, and pause your blockage in the way you blocked it transversely, lest you want to insert it.
And let the blockage be visible.
But if the issuance of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the foot of it in hot water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the blocker errs in the first vein, then iterate with the blockage on one side, because the place is healthy; and do not fear its evil, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do with the cephalic vein of the other foot in a similar manner.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is similarly as we have said, giving off the talon below the hollow of the silvan region.
And the youthful assistance of the blockage of it is for pain of aching when it is due to blood caution.
And the quality of the blockage of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and tightens and strengthens the skin of their ankle from the side of the narrow part underneath the talon underneath four toes in a long subtle band, because it does not appear except for that.
And then when it appears, then you block it according to each engine that is at your possibility and transversely, and it is better; or insert it for insertion or section it for sectioning, because the place of it is healthy.
And it is in many homes very much loved; and if you obstruct it, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then block some root of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular toe and the ring-shaped toe.
And take care of the nerves, and make run of the blood the quantity that you want.
And then release the structure and pause over the area of the fleubotomia cut, and strengthen the area, because the ulceration is healing.
Of evacuation and of the qualities of using those.
Evacuations are made through the horns, or through the veins, or through the nerves.
And evacuation is done according to two methods: one of them is scarification and blood extraction, and the other is evacuation without scarification.
And this evacuation without scarification is done according to two methods, because either it is with a cautery or without a cautery.
And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 14 places of the body, of which one is behind the knee, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the arm beside the joint; and evacuations below the mandible, below the mouth; and evacuations of two spatulas; and evacuations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and evacuations of two fillets, and they are of two arms; and evacuations of two cavities; and evacuations of two thighs.
And evacuation does not extract blood except from the small, scattered veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch the virtue through them, just as it happens with fleubotomia; nor is it known that evacuation is done with a cautery or without a cautery in any malady made by replication until the whole body is evacuated.
Sometimes it is necessary to provoke evacuation for illness or for continuity, administer that at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in one of those causes, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command that evacuation should be done more frequently than two or three hours after dawn.
And the benefit of evacuation from the neck is that when it confers gravity to the head and for this reason it is deep in the eyes; sometimes it is known that this is an opportune evacuation of the whole body.
And this evacuation is at the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic (head).
And it is not lawful to use that evacuation on him who has a complete fracture, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great nuisance.
And for this reason it is not known that the use of those evacuations is old, and in the heads of those who have frequent illnesses.
Sometimes it happens that he who is continuously on top of that evacuation is made to forget; and for this reason it is known that you command the evacuator to place his hand a little above the ventose at the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Sometimes evacuation of the shoulder is at the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers asthma, and constriction of the wings and scission of the instrument of the wings, and to all, and replication.
And it is known that the evacuation of the shoulder is hindered a little, because if it is placed below, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
And the evacuation of the hagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and emigration, and prophylaxis, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the place of phlebotomy of the basilisque.
And it is known that you command the evacuator not to press his hand on the scarification so that he does not incise the artery and accelerate fluxes of blood.
And evacuation below the chin confers a cold in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similarity to those illnesses that are in the mouth, and it is at the place of phlebotomy of the alihelic that are in both lips.
Sometimes the evacuation that is done on the two spatulas confers a capitation, which is made by replication of heat.
And the evacuation of the two inner parts of the fillets confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, dark and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those veins as well as the small veins in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins until it brings attraction to the three veins.
And command the surgeon to not proceed too deeply in the scarification, because the area is deprived of flesh, and thus his nerves and arteries.
It is a wound that is treated by applying compresses to the hemorrhages of the back and to the purulent ulcers.
And beware that you command the surgeon to make a large wound, and let it be of iron, because the area needs strong suction; and strongly his subtle wounds are scarified in the scarification.
More wounds of the smaller veins are manifest for minor bleeding, because they attract the blood from the entire body, and they comfort ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke menses, and they comfort and alleviate; and they stand in place of flebotomy of two soporific, and galen, and of two cavities.
However, I must deplete the entire body and hasten to accelerate syncopes in many homes.
And from the wounds galen-style, the youthful appearance is proportional to the youthful appearance at the wounds of two veins.
And the quality of the position of the wounds is that it stops the wound at the beginning of the vein and sucks for tempered suction, and does not prolong the position of the wounds, but rather pauses them lightly, and remains quietly, and that the humors come to the area for a favorable event. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the area already reddened and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, beware that you scarify him gently and do not push, so that the area is not ulcerated.
And command the surgeon to amplify the scarification and make a small incision, and temperately facilitate the suction.
And if the blood is gross, then beware that you scarify two gentle incisions, because in the first incision the way of subtle suction to the blood and its acquiescence is opened. More in the second (incision) to the acquired perception of the extraction of the gross blood.
And if the blood is very fetid, then make a third incision for scarification, so that it cleans the posterior.
And afterwards, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood is gross, then beware that you scarify for profound scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the code only so much.
And if that of which the code is gross, hard, dark, and the sieve pores are very narrow, beware that the places of the wounds are anointed with lenitive, resolving (medications); if it is in summer, thus as it is oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of bitter herbs, or oil of clemency of coil; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem (similar).
And if the superfloody is gross, cold, then the oil should be amaranth, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloe, or oil of anet, and to their semblance.
More if the surgeon is of ample pores of tender flesh, then beware that it is prohibited from oil, and beware that to those places of wounds their own proper ventozation should be washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of coil, or water of bordolaguas, and semblance to those.
And that of which the blood is of much humidity, wash its wounds with agreeable wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And that of which the superfloodies are gross, wash its wounds with ancient wine, or water of sansuc, which is marjoram, or decoction of anet, or chamomile, and to their semblance.
And beware that the ventozation should be kept away from steam; having beware that it should be administered properly in front of steam for an hour or two, and beware that it sleeps properly with the ventozation.
What is it that ought to be regulated, a veined one, from phlebotomy before ventozation.
Beware that you consider at the beginning: then if the surgeon or he who must phlebotomize is choleric and vents above the blood agitated and inflamed, then beware that you take causes of infrigidation, thus as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in agreeable wine and laytuguas, and secanabin, and julep, and to their semblance.
And stop their veins thus as pollets, and flesh of golden serpents, and veins constricted with grasping, and to their semblance.
And if the complexion is cold, it is fitting to take in wine and aromatic herbs, or essence of hemp, and sumac, and I want a strong odor coming from the fire between November and Christmas; and he should be commanded to use few clothes and to eat lightly, and to pause the wandering of his feet and thighs and urinating little and evacuating small intestines.
And it is fitting that on the day of windiness and flower-botany, the wine should be greater than the food.
And it is fitting that wine be given at certain hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alcilita during windiness or during flower-botany or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtly purified; and I do not think that they take that scalfatz.
Maybe the windy things that are their scarification are windy things that are paused on the feet, and on the worse gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the inflammation of the ankle, because these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought for those things except to attract blood of a member, thus as I pause windy things on the worst gout in bad flux of blood from the blood of the veins; and I use that thing so that the cold windy condition is dissolved from the member, thus as I pause over the belly and the navel; because that rarifies the member and evacuates it and removes the pain since it resolves windiness.
And already it is paused on the roots when they accumulate in their opilation or pore, because for virtue of strong attraction the humble opilation is fortified and eradicates the pore from its place.
And similarly it happens when it is paused on the feet and worse gout, then windiness is enclosed in those enclosures.
And these windy things are administered with juice and sap only; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
And some vegetables are administered full of water and decoction in the bad gouty places.
And that is so that the windiness is filled and becomes greater, thus it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cooked for that convenience.
Form of windiness administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orrifici be of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon be the width of a palm; and let it be in the latz of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the width of it, the trauc being small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Let it be made of iron rod or citrine, with large margins, lion, and other things for so that it does not leave the member from its position on it.
And let it be in the middle of the vertical iron or iron rod, where a candle is paused at the fire.
And already this windiness is greater than the one which we have recommended; and the small remedy of that according to the gouty places and the state of the one who uses it.
And the windy things of old age are extinguished, so others than the windiness of the young and of large strong bodies.
And the quality of pausing this windiness at the fire over the member is that it extends the wax decently denant a small candle of tallow, and pauses it over the middle of the vertical rod in the middle place of the windiness, so that the fire is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is paused over the member of the patient, and the finger is on the trauc that we have said, until when we have the windiness and do not induce that the finger opens and the vapor rises over that trauc, then the windiness will be almost dissolved.
And properly ignite the wax according to its manner, and thus it is induced if it is ignited from that.
Maybe in windiness that is administered in the gouty place of flatness, with water, in which there is no vertical rod nor trauc, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is paused over the member thus alone.
And this is its form: And this windiness the more it is great, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 148.
Blood-lettings are not administered in many members except in the members where it is not possible to position windiness, due to their smallness, thus as with the pot and gum and similarly to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, thus as the finger and nose and similarly to them.
And the quality of using those that you have found blood-lettings which are in the watery places of purging world.
And then they are laid down during the day and night in watery places until they are famished, and that no remaining cause is in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with flower-botany and windiness; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it reddens; and then they are paused over it.
And when they are filled and closed.
And if it is possible to suck out the air from the affected area, it is more suitable for juvenation.
And otherwise, then wash the affected area with warm water and add a lot of water; and it should be cooled and expressed.
And if the flow of blood to the affected area is prolonged by the application of leeches, and it is resolved, then soak a cloth in cold water, and pause that on top until the resolution is absorbed.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder with vitriol thrice, or gall and similar to their stippling causes, until the blood is abscessed; or place on the affected area the cooked and crushed heads of beans, and they will be absorbed until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is abscessed.
And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of leeches, when it is possible to move them.
And if the leeches are forbidden from suspension, then cool the affected area with fresh blood or stick a needle in the areas until blood is obtained; and afterwards place them, for they sense some blood as soon as they adhere.
And when you want them to fall off, powder on them a little of thrice-tried aloes, or salt, or cinder, and it will happen soon.
Thus begins the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not found anything in any time to be complete; and no one has admitted what comes after, except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, until they extract the science from them.
And then I direct my effort and study to the length of my own life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my own experiment; since here I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of prolongation; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it into many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections of bone fractures, from which the necessary precautions are, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse ones, if singular. I will therefore outline in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters for the understanding of those which from the beginning are foreseen by the craftsmen and established on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art besides you.
And therefore I say that when accidents occur due to fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling, then it is necessary that you take care at the beginning with fleshbotomy or alleviating that, or whatever steps, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or old age in decrepitude, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and of meats of birds and of crustaceans; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and all diet that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which they were accustomed to before.
And then since the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and gross nourishment, thus as their diets are made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and cabbage, and fish, and beef, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar ones, and at this regimen is made coagulation of fracture by gentle and moderate treatment.
And you know that the brittle bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of their members.
The supreme nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause like glue in which it is grossly strengthened that adheres and strengthens until they are conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits them from their own works.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which there is gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
And we know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in a distinct chapter separate from the others.
Many varieties of fracture in the same bone. And the species of fracture in the bone are diversified among themselves; because there is an arched fracture which occurs on the stars; and some veiled ones are made with a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and proceeding and not-proceeding, as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to each species belongs a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come to remembrance of it distinctly in its own places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And by which is known a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and the eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and thus of it when it is comprehended by your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor does it feel like a touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is twisting or small fissure, so much that you cannot feel it with your hand and with total compression; however, pause over the bone of the medicines which I will recall at that moment what is convenient for the place; and therefore strive for a subtle strictness.
And we know that the place where it is arched and not divided into two or another thing which does not occur in the sagittal, as it is entirely dislocated from its own comparison, then it is clear that you begin from your hour to rectification of it, because at that point it will reach apostema caution.
And if it reaches apostema caution, then let it be for some days until the apostema ceases; and therefore I will bind it according to whatever method you can of elevation and of ingeniosity.
And we know that restoration of it and reduction of it is more difficult than the bone in which it occurs, especially in the sagittal.
And therefore I will strengthen it according to what will come to remembrance of it.
But if the bone is sagittal, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you perform that they return to their ingenious and natural place, according to whatever method you can in their places.
And beware according to your strength that you do not fall on the patient during your operation, nor cause harm; and perform according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to their best forms.
And it is clear that at that hour you profitably touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is some diverse cause, rectify it and bind it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who cause apostema caution through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen that through the operation of many foolish doctors.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because we know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the vein, and similar to those, then it is clear that the envelopment should be with a very subtle drap.
Those who have large thighs like a cushion or chest, it is said that in them there is involved a hard and lasting connection, because the ligament connects the large member strongly and equally in all parts, so that in it no stain enters.
And then begin, make your evacuation of equity, place a convenient ligament on the water, above the area of that fracture in three or four wraps according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand with a small ligament.
And then see that it goes to the affected part above the area of the fracture, and strengthen mind that you do not force your structure on the one that has strengthened the area of the fracture. And then extend yourself to the wrapping of the area of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure little by little, until you take hold of the area with a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other wounded area above the wrapping of the threefold area, and then see that the wrappings are on the affected part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening according to what we have said in the primary wrapping from above.
And then pause between the layers of the wrapping to stop the inflammation or swelling where the twisting of the fracture is engaged, if it is twisted; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then engage on these wrappings decently made so far, if in the area there is no inflammation or apostema to beware of, and then pause on the water that sits on the apostema and removes the inflammation; and let it be for several days; and then you strengthen on the same wrappings.
And let the wrappings of the mixture of cannabis and lead root, be formed wisely; or of the wood of pine; or of strips of palm; and let each wrapping be according to this form and figure.
However, it is fitting that the wrapping which is placed on that fracture be thicker and longer a little than the other wrappings, and the length of the strip according to what is measured on the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen on the wrappings with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then tie from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the area of the fracture itself, and when it is more distanced from the fracture, it lessens the structure.
And it is fitting that the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and of soft wool; and if the threads are too thick, thus as you have seen through the operation of several foolish pauses, entwining the threads of the cord of the tort, and it is a great error, when you cut the structure without equality.
And excessively thin threads are not so convenient, because you do not conserve the structure for the water that you want, and it is not fitting that between wrapping and wrapping there be less than a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the wrappings to the structure in those places, then pause below those that stop inflammation or burning heat until it does not make a lesion.
Some wounded fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
And you know that all torn members are not straightened with wrappings on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not fit to pause on the wrappings unless for five or seven days or more, according to your secure expectation of the arrival of apostema beware.
And this is the manner of the implanters in which the Ancients restored, those who were placed on fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Method of implantation as an abbreviation of restoration of fracture, convenient for complex movements and majorment to the veins and joints, because it is about that on which there comes no heat nor cold: and it is that you take dust from the mill, and it is the marrow of the farina that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the mill.
And you find that thus as it is, except that you gather it in an album of skin, and pause the complexation of the non-spaced or subtle; and then use that.
Another manner of restoring fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from millet grains salvage, one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one drachm; alochil one drachm and twenty; all are mixed and stirred together with water or album of honey if the complexion of the patient is cold; and then use this restoration, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones moderately, and confers a lot of comfort.
Another manner of restoring which confers on a fracture and twist: recipe of migrach and white altaea one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one drachm five; of acacia one drachm six; of Armenian boil one drachm twenty.
All grind to mortar at the same time, and crush well, and mix in water or in white album of egg and it shall be administered.
Manual of setting bones for joints and separated osses from their places, and then accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: take a woolen thread and submerge it in warm oil and cut it and place it on the area.
Moreover, in this setting, there is not virtue of restoration, but rather a cautious expulsion of pains properly.
Another manual of setting that restores broken bones: take fig leaves of a sweet sort and poppy leaves preserved; mix all together and make an emplacement of them.
Manual of setting abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining aposteme: take root of clay, of chamomile and violet flowers, of barley flour, all together in a partition. Grind all together and mix in wine, if the member is not scaled.
Moreover, if it is scaled, then make a compress with water of sweet marjoram or with water and use it thus.
Another manual of setting strongly resolves that this first, when apostemes harden for the restoration of the member: take root of clay and of hemp seeds, and of balsam, and melilot, majoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all together in a partition; grind all together and mix in water of sage or in water twice distilled or in wine, all according to the quality of the member and the repair of its color.
Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed on the member trembling for its restoration, but rather a mixture of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be balanced between thickness and subtlety.
Moreover, Gualia has seen that it should be placed on the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is exsiccation of little heat, thus also with myrrh, and similarly to those causes that we have recommended.
Manual of setting that comforts lesion and pain: take migat, of cedars, of inner skin of a wild man or pennyroyal, and of clay, and salt, mixed together; grind all together and crush well and mix, and make an emplacement.
Moreover, the quantity according to which one covers the wound and it is dislocated, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken nor moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days. And if there is a violently painful place or swelling or inflammation, then you should touch or delay it at that hour, and remove the setting from it.
And take a draught of lion's humour and marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then let it rest for an hour; and then place on it a woolen thread submerged in warm oil or rose oil, and bind it around for a night until you are certain of cautious aposteme, and that it has repaired the inflammation of the member, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply that subtle structure and small setting, and do not strongly bind with your primary construction, but rather subtly until it is healthy.
And if at times the aposteme and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are so completely removed, and you have need of setting and structure, then apply that thus as you have begun the entire treatment from the start.
And if there does not occur to the member any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not delay it except for three days or four or five. and some wet applications all together are left on for 20 days according to what appears to you for the dislocation of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure entirely, and assist in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Moreover, if you find the place of the fracture is dry and thin more than it should not cover, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from arriving at that; and therefore embrocate it with warm water throughout all the wet applications that delay it; and it is in all three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the member's nourishment, and it is healthy gradually.
More than it is customary to make the restorative remedies for a fractured limb otherwise treated when not initially restored, according to which they converge, and it is restored according to twisting, it is an error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were to increase the ancient liberties and gain control over what has been done.
And you have not seen any of theirs that it does far, because it is more reasonable that it does not do so.
Chapter according to: Of the fracture which occurs at the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of a bone, and the percussion occupies all the bone within the cipher, which is beneath the bone, thus as if it were in the fist, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the bone breaks into some part of itself, and breaks the flesh around it and does not pass beyond the rear of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and the cause of it is percussion with a heavy or falling object on stone, and its signs are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating that already approaches the peritoneum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture it is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made or by falling or by percussion of stone and its signs are similar, which makes some layer of the bone enter the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location thus as it occurs at the edges of the erema when it occurs at their percussion and it is part of their entrance into the divided parts.
And mostly it is made in the bodies of humid bones, thus as they are hollow and empty.
And all these species of fractures are saturnine, so they are pesky thus as separated stars. And you will find the remedy for all this in its place.
And I will reveal all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tender and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is above them.
And the capillary species is recognized by this that it is discovered above the bone, and it is cleared, and limited to its tender part, because the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the malady, and then if you times for the accidents that signify by manifest significance on fear, thus as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of vote, and syncope, and acute fever, and settlement of the veins and rigor of those, and similar to their accidents in the major dispositions, they are not healed.
And if you find non-concurrent accidents you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is because if it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it is a plague and it is in the days of winter, then it converges that you study in the osteament of the bone within the 14th day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it converges that you touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents we have recounted happen.
And if the fracture has reached the peritoneum covering the brain, and it is among divided parts and attraction, then it converges that you insert the comminuted and attractive part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
And it is that you raise the head of the malady plague, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner possible for you according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter above the malady.
And if it occurs to you to make the detection of the bone, either blood or aposteme caut, then you oppose yourself to what converges, and it is that you fill the place of draps infused with wine and rose oil, and make repose the plague until it be sedated by the aposteme, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you insert the bone with an instrument of straight talent, and this is its form: And then administer another instrument like this, a little wider later than that; and this is its form:
And then administer more instruments wider than the one mentioned.
And it converges that you have the name of diverse instruments, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or steel.
And use of their arm has facilitated percussion on the affected area so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
If the bone is strong and hard, then you should perforate in the circle of their teeth while administering the affected areas with non-deep probes.
And it is not called thus, but rather because those do not touch the term of the bone of the head to that which is near them, so that the round extremity or margin above that which is beneath the head appears like a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passes the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these probes which almost converge at the thickness of each bone, so that they are present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of probes: The quality of perforating in the circle of the broken bone is that it pauses the probe on the bone and revolves it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then pierce the probe to another place, and pause there where it is throughout the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment.
And then you insert the probes into the affected areas that are between each part of the bone, and make a subtle pus that you place on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, so that you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause to stir up the instruments which will be prepared for it, as we have said, and with subtle forceps.
And take care that you keep the probe with total caution so that it does not touch any part of the cranium.
And thus you will have circled the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cranium if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted it, take care that you scrape and equalize it in the roughness of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to a probe, but rather take care that it is a subtle pus and more subtle than the other probes.
And if you remove some small parts of the bones and cartilages, then take that which is facilitated in that which is due to you from the instruments; and then cure the wound with ointments and unguents which we have said.
And another manner of operation is gentle, far from pain, which Galen and the expert say is for great relief; and this is its sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, so that when you have discovered that part and placed beneath it the gentle and light extremity of this probe, this is the form.
And it is that the lenticular part is gentle and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two layers ahead in length, as we have said; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cranium on the face of the incident acute bone.
And then you percussion on the probe of a part with a small hammer until you have perforated all the bone in a facilitated way as it revolves, and you will be sure of the panniculus that does not fall into the accident that you fear in no manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if it were dormant.
Then if you remove some annexed cause from the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, it will perforate that of it with the extremity of the lenticular probe, and deliver that of it in a facilitated way, because it is delivered from its noument and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is abstracted or separated from the bone is the face of it, and you remove its roughness and subtle cartilages, then take care that you scrape that roughness and radiate those subtle cartilages with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to administer them in every place where they are most convenient and most direct according to what you perceive as the goal of your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And take care that you administer in your reason where it radiates the bone at the beginning of the most latent of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you reach administering the most subtle and thinnest parts of all those.
Moreover, in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, take care that you administer cure according to what you perceive as the goal of rectification of it.
And it is a cause that is not diminished over all those who have studied in that art. And thus about what we have written, we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is retracted when you radiate the bone, then take care that you take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rozated oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another double or triple drap and submerge it in wine and rozated oil and place it on the primary drap, making it as gentle as possible so that it does not irritate the cranium; and then administer above the latent liament, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has, so solamente.
And that medicine should be administered for one or two days before being certain of apostema's caution; and then remove it and administer medicines which are excessively drying, thus as a mixture of linseed and farina of bitter herbs, and powder of ginger and aristology, and resembling those.
It is that you make powders of these medicines which are powdered over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer all this proprietary medicine of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And beware that your virtue is not in the wound's cure being dirty; and it should not be in the excess of ointments nor another; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with malignant malice.
And it falls upon the siphac of the head, as if the bone is mondified and majorly when the cure is misprescribed, and it is negated on the surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with accidents that we have said, knowing that it is perilous all told.
And if it does not fall upon the blackness but from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then you should take a mixture of honey and rose oil, three parts. And apply those liniments as a bandage, and then pause that over the siphac; and then cure it with the species of cures that converge within so that it may be healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is bruised.
You know that it is not bruised on the nose but rather two parties simultaneously swollen, or one of those alcune veins, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not bruised and does not fall upon it except with atrition and tortuosity and sinew.
But if one of the two parties of it is bruised, then you should introduce the small finger into the nasal cavity, and that you should bind that fracture with a bandage, and with the small finger beforehand, until the nose returns to its natural figure. And do it so that you may facilitate it, and beware that you do not fall into that operation on the patient's malady.
And if the fracture is in the upper swollen party of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then you should equalize it with the extremity of a rod on which there is a small groove.
And if the fracture is in two parties, then you make a similar thing to that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the apostema's caution.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one party, or half of two calves, if the fracture is in two parties, and it should be in the calve with as much quantity that fills the tract of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calves should be wrapped in bandage, and should be changed every day, but it has not been seen by me; however, I think that the piece should be wrapped in album of cotton or comfit with powder of millet; and then leave the water until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And some veins are introduced into the nose, in place of a calve, penalty of water that is enveloped with cloth of linen and lead; and it is that you already have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calves.
And if another vein of apostema's caution falls, apply the nose with cerote or cotone infused in wine and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if apostema's caution does not fall, then you should apply beforehand with flour of Sizami and powder of ginger cofitz in album of cotton; and then pause over the gold stopper, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are bruised with a small fracture or so comminuted, then you should split over those, and extract those with instruments that converge upon those; and then sew the split, and cure it with that which incorporates and consolidates, and applies to that convenient.
And if a wound falls on the nose, then you should cure it with calves and administer pipes of lead until it is entirely healed.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is bruised.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a wound, consider then if the fracture is beforehand so solitary, and it is not bruised in two and is curved to the parties within, then its cognition is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the index finger of your right hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and thus you will feel the jagged edges of the fracture and facilitate the reduction of the displaced parts before, with your other hand on the opposite side of the bone; and thus you will make it easier to set it in place.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two, then you should administer extension of the two parts according to the rectitude within, so that it is possible to set it in place.
And if you encounter dislocation of teeth, then strengthen those which seem to be held by a thread of gold or silver or copper; and place a pause on the cracked jawbone, and place a pause on the duplicated wrapping, and a pause on the large stellar bandage decently made, or a single layer of equal length along the jawbone; and thus you will bind it according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, so that it does not get destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and abstain from eating heavy foods for a while.
And if you think that the figure has been altered in some way, then you should touch and feel it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of soft powder, album of egg, or flour of chamomile, since you will have removed the crust from it, and place the poultice on the affected area for a while.
And then add cum sta annex and adjust the poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, so leave it, until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; because many weakened fractures are straightened in three weeks.
And if another weakened fracture occurs with abscess, then administer what we have said for many weakened fractures in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is a plague, then consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or splinters, then you will subtly remove those splinters in a way that is convenient for their removal with the instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is narrow, then you will enlarge it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and none will remain, then you will close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place one of the poultices that are convenient for it and encrust it, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the forearm when it is injured.
Many weakened fractures are broken in the forearm near the elbow, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch splinters; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that splinters form in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a plague.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and holds the broken forearm, and the other extends the vein to that part.
And then bind the fracture with bandages until it takes the form of it according to its nature, and it is not in a state of little eminence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place beneath the patient's bed a mattress or a woolen cloth, and its greatness according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the forearm and bend the hand with your own hand until it binds the fracture according to its nature.
And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the forearm to its former parts, because it is perverted to the prono, then it is convenient that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion under the muscle of one side, in great size.
And the minister precedes the muscle of it to the parts below until the bone of the forearm is elevated as it is in the prono itself, and then you rectify the fracture and bind it with bandages.
But if you feel splinters of the forearm and it is swollen, then it is convenient to make a poultice over that and extract those splinters to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you will make an incision of it with one of the instruments which have been prepared for that, since you had placed beneath the forearm the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form.
And it is similar to a scoop of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the littleness of it.
The length of the operating table should be such that it is as accessible to you as possible during the operation; let there be two extensions at the ends, one extended and the other contracted.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you extracted the abscess from the bone is large, and you are certain of a cautious post-suture, then adjust both lips of the wound to the suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a cautious post-suture, then fill the wound with drainage and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the wound.
And if you suspect a cautious post-suture, then pour in drainage with vinegar and rose oil, and pause over that.
And thus, that the board is not moved away from the broken bone; and for this reason you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is softened or the board is already removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the bond.
And then pause to let the patient sleep on their neck, and place beneath their title of bone, so that in the night a small cushion supports their neck; for thus the adjacent muscle of theirs is elevated from the side of that, and therefore the fracture of the ribcage is elevated by the muscle; or it is the arm of theirs tied to the neck.
And do not loosen the ligament unless you suspect it in the spot of the abscess or post-suture, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the bone up to that point, and adjust it to the structure and restore it, so that it is restored and the fracture of the ribcage is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some vegetables eaten at home are made in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
The shoulder blade is broken in the lateral spot of the bone and it does not break unless at the margins.
And then when the bone is broken in its spot  and it is broken in the middle spot of the bone  and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture it is necessary to prepare the bone and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner possible to you.
And then pause over the spot powdered with flour of millet in album of wolf's bane and joint; and then sprinkle double-layered powders of cloth; and then pause over the subtle wooden board according to the quantity of the entire shoulder blade or a little more.
If the board is concave in some of the spots of the shoulder blade, then you bend that concavity to the joint, and then adjust the board according to equality.
And then strengthen it below with a long humectant, with gentle compression and firmness of the board, so that it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are softened, another vegetable and strengthen it and adjust the board if it is removed from its place.
And let the patient rest on their own side thus.
And the shoulder blade is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And then when this number is complete, then you loosen the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is one of the bones which begins to heal without its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the spot of the bone to the ankle and place beneath the codena, then you should divide it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the ribcage, with caution of post-suture abscess, if you suspect it here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of fractures of the foot.
The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle spot of it and that is why it ends; maybe the extensions of the bone are very short, cracked and comminuted.
From the accidents of the patient when their spine is broken it is that which declines into the divided parts and accumulates in the great pain, and difficulty in the breathing, and thus, and strong and vomits blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be repositioned on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulder blades; and then prepare the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs to the hands of two ribs, and subtle in the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner that is possible and that converges to it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
And then place a poultice on the wound and stop the bleeding, and place above it a subtle table of sage or of calamine and of its similar lightness in elevation, since you envelop it in a wrapping; and then subtly adjust that over the broken bone so it is not moved; and go to the binding according to the returned tone of some evacuated veins, and strengthen that with a decent structure; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that corrupting corrosion or pus, or pain, or abscess that accumulates in the area, then cut and dissect that and eradicate the wound and rectify what accumulates because of it in the manner of curing it; and then return the wound, if sometimes it faces you; and adjust its structure until it is healthy.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their part from within do not accumulate to those contradictions unless for what is cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry into its defects.
And the restoration is thus that it equals the fracture with its defects according to the possible manner, until it is equal as it was, and then wound and strengthen the broken bone with a star, if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines into the divided parts, then it accumulates in the patient vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that accumulates in one who has suffered a fall, and because of which the bone puts forth a swelling; and it accumulates in the difficulty of breathing, and thus, and vomits much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antics were ingenious in that with many ingenious remedies.
And they said that it is necessary to pause the windings of the patient that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed back into its proper parts.
We must avoid that for fear of generating a warm abscess, if it does not accumulate; and if it has already accumulated, then it helps towards that.
And they said that some of them should be paused under the windings and then sucked with a strong force; and it is similar to reasoning, but I, the emperor, fear that the windings will attract the superfluities to the area due to debilitation.
And they said that some of them: it is necessary for the area to be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and then paused powders between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is equal when you envelop it according to the returned tone; and then the patient is cured with a cure of poultices and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constraint to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth a swelling with painful puncture, fear over the patient, then it is necessary to fend off from the area, discover the broken rib, and then pause above that instrument which preserves the scaphoid, the remembrance of which precedes, and that inserts the bone with facilitation, and extracts it.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and cure it with wounds until it is healed.
And if it accumulates into an abscess, then you cut and pour powders in rose oil and pause above the area, and the patient is cured with what is necessary for the abscess.
And it is repositioned on the mattress on which one sleeps, until it is healthy.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Some evacuated veins show fracture in the bones of the neck, and it is necessary to attract them to their proper place, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And with that it accumulates to some and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider, because sometimes the veins are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when they constrain those in the tender defects or prick those with a needle and do not feel pain in those, then you know that it is not healthy, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
And if those veins are constricted and stuck in the narrow passages, then you know that the patient's back is saved and that the sick person will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then examine their feet.
Then if you find that they are already weakened, it means that what has happened to their limbs, and when you sit on the patient's back, you feel ventosity and egestion of their will, and some evacuated fluids are repositioned on the patient's back, wanting to urinate and unable to do so, then you know that they are mortally ill, and therefore do not struggle with their treatment.
Perhaps if you don't find any cause for this, the cause is hidden and more subtle.
And the treatment of it is that you perform a sedation of the abscessed aposteme because it presses on the irritated vertebrae or at least on the two humors; pause on that until some evacuated fluids are released during the day until the aposteme is sedated.
And then apply some comforting and soothing emplasters, and strengthen that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if you find the root of the bone's dislocation or some cause that has already separated from it, then uncover the codena and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, sewing it up if it is large; and then cure that with an encarnation of the enguents, until it is healed.
Perhaps if the bone's rear part is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then uncover that you introduce your finger into the anus, and reposition the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary alignment; and then apply an emplaster and astelha, if you need those, and then strengthen that.
And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then feel around that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the Restoration of the Narrow Passages.
The bones of the narrow passages are easily broken, and if they break, the fracture is only communicated to the extremities of those and are inscribed in their length and decline towards the internal parts; and you find pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is on the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you reposition that according to what appears to you as equal alignment until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Perhaps if the fracture is in the loins or already declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their back, abdomen upwards, until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have repositioned that, apply an emplaster to it, and then apply a bandage of wood or of codena, and strengthen it with a stricture on which there is no threat of puncture of fracture nor movement of the bandage.
And reposition the concavity in that which fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Perhaps if you find an abscessed aposteme, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscessed aposteme is sedated, and apply to it what surrounds that according to what precedes; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen that thus as it convalesces.
And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Adjacent Parts.
The adjacent parts are those that are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take a wooden board placed beside the middle groove according to this form:
And tie them in two extremities with two bandages, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
And seat the patient on a chair; and then put the broken arm on the wood until it reaches the tiny part of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor examines whether the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns according to its convalescence.
And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back, cervitz upwards, and suspends the hand of the neck with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds the pus below it; and each of them extends to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then stretch over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and almost all of the two ministers extend their parts.
So if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the citellum and the other half below the fracture towards the hip.
And similarly if the fracture is near the hip, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that place and over that hip.
Remove that which is obstructing and gives trouble, and then apply it according to what is necessary and apply it for good application, then stretch it if it does not cause an abscess or aposteme.
But if it causes an abscess or aposteme, then lay a stricture within seven days, and pause on the woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rose oil until it rests and the abscess settles, and then you stretch it.
And the manner of stretching it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place an envelopment of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjunct, and place your hand over the surrounding muscle.
And place the cloth and stretch over the adjunct, the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
And then use stilts.
And it is that you place on the fracture that stilt which is more laden and stronger than the other stilts; and place between each stilt the width of a finger, and let the length of the stilts be according to the break with an addition of three fingers of the whole part.
And then stretch over the stilts with the stricture which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture over the place of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more healed, the stricture should be less.
And so if you observe the situation of the stilts and the stricture as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its original position, then you do it.
And if you fear an abscess or aposteme, then you lay aside the stricture and the stilts until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not cause discomfort or inflammation; or it is forbidden to bring food to the member by disposing of the superfluity of stricture; and thus rectify everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that it does not cause any harm from this, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
And place on the adjunct a cushion full of woolen padding, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, thus rectify everything according to your virtue.
And give the patient's food according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then it is necessary to increase the amount of food.
Since the custom of the adjunct and of the leg is that they are strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary to loosen them and administer a bath and be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly bruised, then you do not loosen that bandage and stilts for a month or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; one of them is small, and it is the one that is called the wrist, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the small fork, from the part below.
And sometimes the larger fork is broken alone, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are broken together.
And when the smaller fork is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
And when the fork of it is broken above the fracture, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
So if the bone that is broken is the smaller fork below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension with a facilitating instrument until it is healed.
But if the larger fork is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a stronger extension.
And if both forks are broken together, then it is necessary to make the extraction more forceful.
And it is necessary to make the figure of the hand in such a way that its restoration and extension are stretched out over a hip, and the palm of the hand is at the parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be seated on a curved chair.
It is a cushion placed beneath them in the altitude or direction of their body, so that the patient does not encounter trouble.
Then one minister extends an arm from the affected part, and places his hand or limb, and another minister extends similarly above.
And then the doctor wraps the bone inward so that it returns to its better shape as much as possible.
And if the fracture of the bone is dislocated, then you must make an effort to reduce the entire mass in its proper place with your manual strength.
And if it appears in the separated fracture that you have touched the code and it is not your hope for its restoration, then you finish above it and leave that according to the manner which we have said above.
Perhaps the fracture is a plague, and you have already made a special agreement about that capital, and so take care of it.
And if you find an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then lay a layer of cerote oil mixed with white wax and rose oil, and it is better between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the layer over that in a subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerote and pause to apply a plaster prepared from powder of molten clay, and place stilhas; and let the stilha be the one that is paused over that fracture so it will heal and strengthen.
And you know that the number of stilhas on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is the fracture in a focus or in two focuses together.
And then pause your structure over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when perhaps the extrication is to the upper parts above the fracture or to the lower parts below it, pause the structure a little more slowly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the layers that are wrapped around the fracture are very humid layers, and they are not hard nor rough, and the thread which is stretched is the one that is better suited to be between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and its ligament to be almost healed after some days. And if you find some cause for which rectification is necessary, as we have previously mentioned, and then it is necessary to rebreak the limb with warm water until that rectification ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return to the structure.
And if the extrication is already mollified and the bone is already remodeled and resembles those, then rectify everything with your manual strength.
And consider that perhaps the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excess of structure, because then it is necessary to mollify it a little and let it be for some days until it runs to that nourishment, and then strengthen it.
Perhaps if the patient does not find any cause among those that we have said, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around that.
And then the hand of the patient is suspended by its own power of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And you know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the strength.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the ankle and fingers.
You know that in the ankle of the hand and the joints of the fingers, fractures often occur, and they do not find their place unless with carefully prepared remedies.
And when you find a hand fracture or dislocation, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight line and align themselves according to equality, and then pause the hand of theirs on that extended part.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor wraps them inward so that they are conjoined in good conjunction.
And then it is necessary to apply plaster and stop, if you do not find an abscess at the beginning; and then pause the stilha below according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in a layer of cloth.
Perhaps the splint is on the inner parts of the fingers at the belly of the palm, and then make a layer of cloth resembling a bandage, and command the patient to strengthen that with their own palm that is splinted; then it will be strengthened in a long bandage.
And let the stilha of the body be in a layer where it is elevated, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is necessary.
Perhaps if the fracture is in the fore parts, then it is necessary to pause below the stilha and another stilha of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is bent and straightened; and then pause the structure, as the hand is revolved between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the fingers, then it is the finger joint, it should be wrapped according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, pause at the small straight stilha for so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
If the fracture is in other digits, thus as in that of the middle finger, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be straightened and aligned according to the direction of the digit; or if all the fragments are continuous, and it is better; or stop above that small star, thus as we have said in the foot.
And consider, in your restoration, and also place that, the disposition of an abscessed cautery and oppose - it is a tie-up operation - it is what covers when it reaches some cause of those, according to how the narration of it is repeated.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
The bones of the hip joint are bruised and broken, and it is declared by sensation according to how they are converted into pain above and below.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their belly and on their face.
And then extend the minister entirely to the ligament at its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is proposed to reduce the hip joint, then the ligament is placed below the knee at the part of the thigh, so that the extension takes place in itself, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the bruise is proposed at the knee, then it should be made with the ligament placed at the knee, and the extension should be at the parts below.
And then the doctor unites the bone with both hands inside so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it covers that it stops in plaster and structure, if it does not reach the affected member. If it reaches the affected part, then you leave it like that for some days until the abscessed cautery is calmed, and then return to your cure.
The structure of it should be done thus: it covers that you wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and the hip joint.
And insert a long wooden splint between the hip and the leg proper to the knee below, and they come to the extremities of the wooden splint from the part above, and then revolve around the leg and the hip joint so that it surpasses the bandage.
And then stop above the hip joint in the place of that fracture thus, and stop one star above the bone of the leg.
And then fill in the voids between the leg and the hip joint with many cloths, so that the extraction is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong structure above the middle of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have loosened the ligament at the place of the fracture, your structure should be less and lighter and more gentle.
And then extend the two extremities of the wooden splint to the parts below up to the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the stars of the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the structure on that, thus so that it does not reach the corroding member nor abscessed cautery nor inflammation and similarly to those; and if it reaches some cause of those, then cut you off from the disunion of it, and rectify what reaches all at once, according to how we have said many times.
If in the bone there is a piece of bone that it can put, then it covers that you unite it according to how it is possible for you; and if not, finish above it and remove it, and cure what is preceded by the remembrance until it is healed.
And some times it is strengthened, this fracture of the hip joint or other that are adjusted to its stars, thus as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of it, in such a manner that it does not reach the patient's lame condition; and if it is restored alone, or another that the other leg should be applied, then it is necessary that it limps from what was previously.
And you know that the hip joint is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of fractures of the knee joint.
You know that fracture of the knee joint sometimes ends badly, but it reaches many times to its atrition.
If it reaches the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and above that all is established according to the sentiment.
And the restoration of it is thus: that which is reunited with what has been broken off from its parts, and it is added and joined together according to what is possible for equality and facilitation and fabrication.
And you should stop the bleeding and place a plaster on that round wound, if it is indented in that way; and tighten below with a strict bandage to make it suitable.
And you should consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, also with an apostema of caution and similarly to those in which it is opportune to oppose every accident that occurs conveniently until it is healthy.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle and is named ankle.
And it happens to some species of fractures that affect both bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration of it is made similarly to the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into many parts.
And if the smaller bone is broken, the leg is converted into parts of the Ankle.
And if the larger bone is broken, you will encounter those symptoms, and it is for those reasons that they are not easily cured.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligamentation of the tendons according to that engagement.
Moreover, Emperor Cove, if the fracture of the leg is not having many troublesome symptoms, then the extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will help your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the tendons and complete all the tieue operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the palm which are placed beneath the causes that are placed in solutes, and so make a gentle movement of branches of palm; likewise from those to the ones that have small grooves, and do not make gestures with the hands, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the smallest beneath.
And then envelop it with a certain drap in two envelopments according to its length, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the knee down to the smallest base of the foot.
And then bind the two tendons in three places of the extremities and at the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good position.
And then administer a wooden board according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
And moreover, Cove, you do this in a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
And then consider in some days the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, then oppose yourself to it so that Cove enters into it until it is healthy.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not suffer from complete fracture; however, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer from certain fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer from fracture, and do not occur unless there is great violence in the midst of disposal.
And if the bones of the foot receive a fracture and those bones are elevated above themselves between them, then the patient places their own foot on the prepared earth thus as an ant.
And then place one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and engage those until they return to their places.
And then place a plaster and stop below, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
And then strengthen that on the foot in descending structure, since you have enveloped it with drapes and other causes of which it is worthy.
And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the ligament, because you will find the bones engaged, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is thus as it is customary.
Moreover, if some toes are broken, then restore those, and engage those thus as you do and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then place the broken toe tendons according to the length of the toe, and let it be bound with a little of its own part; and then place beneath the foot this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that in descending structure.
Moreover, if that which is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then place on each toe tendons of its own quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the plates of the table against the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
It is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes which have been said to you in other fractures of accidents, and pause to think about each accident so that it covers everything.
Chapter 18.
About the fracture of the neck of the thigh bone and of the bone of the penis and of the wand of the man.
When the neck of the thigh bone is bruised, then make a sitting position on that wounded side, and incline it towards the division of the two a little, and hold it back there.
And place the compress on the neck of the hip joint, and make it just like the neck of the same side; and place the thigh in a concave position, and elevate the back of the small one little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is within the division of the neck of the same side as expected and the bruised bone returns.
And place poultices on the back of it, and when you want to urinate, remove the hip joint to facilitate and make urine flow, and return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and return to the first poultice.
And do it thus for seven days or around that, because then it will be restored.
And if you wish, take an egg of owl and stretch it over the thigh of the patient with a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the neck of the patient, and blow into the tube so that the bladder is inflated inside the neck, because the fracture returns.
And then it will be filled with hip joint and remain thus for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis or thigh of man or woman is bruised, then administer in the restoration and agitation of it, according to what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these proximate fractures, and few happen, mainly to the one who has some study and use of my free book; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the strict structure of it, and therefore understand well.
When the wand of the man is bruised, take a poultice of duck's egg, and put the wand in it; and place a dressing over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and place it thus for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded by a blow.
It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture occurs by a blow, and mainly if the bone is large, such as the bone of the hip or of the adjuster, or similar to that, which you understand and perform thus soon as the conditions of fleubotomy are suitable for you or testify thus as we have said before.
And if the blow flows with blood, then it is necessary that you understand the retention of it in such a way that you dust over the wounded place, if another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers as facilitated and with little extension.
But if the extension is not prepared and the equipment of it with your fingers as more, then you reduce it with your fingers as more according to this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight digits and its width is according to the quantity of the blow; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the quantity that is indicated for this in the cure of all species of fracture.
And it is rounded, and it is in a small groove so that it does not get doubled over itself during the operation hour.
And it is of acute extremity where the margin is in the seven extremities; and it is the underneath of it with a gross tendon tending, and of its greatness within the partitions.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of it be placed on the elevated extremity of the prominent bone.
And insert it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and let it be enclosed with some equipment.
And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken bone is subtle, and do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to its entirety as we have recommended, then dissect that part which is covered by the skin of the incision, or it will be one of the serrations in some manner that it may be possible for you.
And then scrape away what remains of the bone of roughness and of small fragments.
And when the bone is reduced, and then you reduce the patient's atrocious pain with vehement leading, then you know that the bone does not return to its natural place; and therefore you make a great improvement on the patient.
When your restoration is complete, which you do to the bone, and then you submerge it in a viatic stipic oil, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the cerot plague or another cause in which there may be oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
And then you administer stelas at the time of the complete restoration of the bone, and thus you discover the uncovered plague in such a way that you incise the traumatized area with forceps and uses enveloping bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
And beware that you take total caution not to strenghten the plague in the fracture, because motives of bad doctors do it in this way, and they make a mortal or corrupting influence on their patients' bodies, so it is unhealthy. And if the bone structure is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear about those evil accidents which we have recommended, and atrocious pain in the area, then do not think that you pause over those astelas, but rather make an enveloping of hard draps in place of stelas and strengthen it with those.
And when you have begun to treat the plague once or twice a day, which in itself will generate strength, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed over the affected area, and then administer calves, injecting those of our customary practice, which is that we medicate the plagues, thus as injecting tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague in any morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and think that the member should be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction is facilitated from there to the lower parts.
If the plague passes more than three days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from there to the arm, then you know that here are signs of small ulcers because it begins to inquire about the plague in tents. And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated and touch the member and make it hurt, therefore you should incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you touch the plague with zinc oxide or ochre, it is stimulations, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you think that you pause at one of those things which convenes to the cure of which there is a preceding narration in the same chapter.
And of that which you think is the best sermon and you make present your speech: when bones are crushed, empyemas form over the member just like the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the large members, and that you do not assume attraction from it, nor its extraction because many bad doctors induce death; having thus until you purify, for strong is the case if you wait for 20 days or more. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if there is not that one.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of nodes that form in the vicinity of some fracture.
Bad doctors form this node in the vicinity of healthy fracture, and they increase it more near the joints, and it is ornamented by the figure of the member; and strong is the prohibition of the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the node is recent and administer in those medicines that have stipated thus as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similarly to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all, and combine them with vi stipic, or album of huou, or vi agree, and pause it over the node in estopa, and constrict it well over it for good construction.
And let the extrication not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the node is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decently, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
But if the node is already converted into stone and strengthened, and it is necessary to provoke an ostentation with that coytadament, and then you separate it from the upper part of the member, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or scrape that with some rezoris until it is removed; and cure it until it is sanctified.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returns to its subtle member, freely following its natural shape.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returns to its subtle member, freely, it is not done so except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the loosening of the joint that does not follow its natural course; or because of superfluous structure of the ligaments that prohibits nourishment from reaching the member; or because of a multitude of superfluous embrocations; or because of excessive movement not in its proper time; or because of paucity of blood in the patient's body and for debilitation of it.
And the cure of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put poultices and lotions on them.
And then pause the application on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the necessary nourishment, or continues the embrocation with warm water, until the nourishment is corrected and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of broken bones when they are restored improperly and prohibit the operation of their own that is natural.
When accidents happen to a member already restored with a tortuous and prominent bone and node, and it is because of the faulty formation of the member, it mainly impedes the member from its natural operation, then it does not occur that you receive the word of one who examines that member as being newly broken.
Many have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very reprehensible, inducing great fear in the sign of which is mortal.
Many are recent contraction and node, then it occurs that they are embrocated with warm water in which they collect softening herbs, thus as they are fuels of high degree and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and it is done in the emplaster with mollifying emplastering thus as it was well done; or that it is taken with mucilage of root of high degree and is continued in gray of guala or in oil of cirami, and is emplastered in that; or that they are taken with fat figures and are treated in women's colons, and similar to those of the medicines that are named as consolidating remedies.
And some wounds are dissolved in assiduous friction, which is in the most humid places, and movement of the member is administered at all times and in all hours.
Many are twisted and have gone downhill and are made strong and converted into stone and provoked necessity for cure with iron, then it occurs that the pus is removed from above and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and something superfluous of node of that meter is inserted in the bone with subtle incisions, and is administered facility in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On sermon about dislocation.
Dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints from their natural place, because it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is distorted, and brings about great pains and lesions to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and strong with what is done, making difficult the reduction of the dislocation.
And for this reason it does not occur that it is manipulated or stretched at the time of inflammation, because many vigorous movements bring about spasm and intense pain.
Many times when this occurs, then it happens that you are led to the flattering of the patient, and then it is laid down until the inflammation subsides; and then the member is embrocated with warm water and oil, and then it is reduced with facility.
And the whole member is cured with that of which the remembrance will come to its place.
And I have now ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceding in fracture; from the part of the body above down to the part below.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if not straight; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and are softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are softened at the joint until the patient's saliva corrodes and cannot hold it nor close its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Many times when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major arrangements it returns to itself for a slight cause.
Many times when the dislocation is complete and entire, then it occurs that reduction of it should be administered quickly, and not delayed at all.
And the minister holds the patient's head, and inserts his fingers into one of their jaws in the region of the dislocation of the jawbone inside their mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers into both jaws simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands are beforehand positioned where they can hold; and he orders the patient to relax their jaws and release any tension from some quarter; and the doctor holds the jaw and presses it back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporative water with oil, so that it helps to ease the reduction of both and does not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
And then when they are returned and in their place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then pause on those pillows of drape with cerote, and make it smooth with wax and oil rosat; and thus it will be easier to facilitate the limbs' movements.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head steady between two pillows, so that they do not incline to the right or left side; and do not force them into any position; having eaten a light meal, forbid them to eat for a while, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are numb, then let them eat what they want.
And this is administered to facilitate, and do not bother about the perception of the mouth unless eating and drinking and ocitation, until the jaw is numb and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not converted to their proper places, then apply heated cups and soda ashes, and strongly rub the patient's belly, and strongly induce vomiting with pure coleric medicine.
And when you see that, then know that it is pernicious; and apply heated cups more to the one to whom it happens in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint inside the foot through its continuity; and sometimes it is dislocated to the front part beforehand, and that is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is when the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it returns to its place.
And then pause on that plaster and pillows and strengthen it.
But the extremity of one who has a hernia and its continuation with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and put in place according to what we have said and according to your apparatus.
And then pause on that plaster, and pillows, and extraction, and order the patient to hold tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated to the upper part towards the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated to the upper part of the muscle, and that is done with tension; and it is not dislocated to the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts through the nerves.
And especially it is dislocated and beforehand exits to the lower parts because of the titillic, and especially in those in which the flesh is sparse, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many flesh, it is exited with difficulty.
And strongly strike some men with percussion or cauterization, and the patient's muscle is affected by a cautious abscess, and it is cured because it has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you proceed with this until you are certain of its condition, and then you will proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is recognized the dislocation of it when it is in the lower parts because of the titillic; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, since you find among them a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the titillic from the touch of the head of the muscle, just like a void, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the golden shoulder, nor can they move it at all.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the upper parts; and then stops the tied poultices under the titillation of it, and raises the joint strongly in its own place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it there; and then stops it there so that it returns gently.
Perhaps because of what we have said does not return, and so from the beginning it is necessary to accelerate the dislocation, for several days, then it happens that the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered an embrocation that softens and relaxes, thus if it cools quickly, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and stopped under the titillation of it, waiting for a hand to be inserted between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor stops the heel of the foot on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle in a vertebra, and touches the hand of the patient so that it is not bruised at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not bruised at the parts below, because then it will return to its own place.
And if you want, reduce it according to this method: and it is that you should present yourself in front of a man whose length is longer than the patient's, and he is on the side of that bed, and insert your muscle below the titillation of the patient and raise the titillation of it to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of the back. Perhaps the patient is lighter, then it happens that I have another cause that is suspended, so that gravity affects it, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in this way according to another method: and it is that a long stick with a rounded figurehead, like a pile driver, which is not large nor subtle, should be fixed into the ground; then you stop it on top of the patient's foot, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then their hand is extended to the lower parts of the other side; and their body is extended from the other part strongly, because the joint returns to its own place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of a quantity whose length is two arms, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the surface of the titillation according to this form.
And then place the rounded head on top, tied with linen threads so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
And then stop it under the titillation of the patient, and their hand or arm is extended over the stick to the lower parts, and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then stop the arm on a scale of stairs according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters quickly.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it happens that you stop under the titillation sphere of a hand's quantity; and then you prepare an emplaster made from powder of moly and album of egg whites over all the muscle, thus it is revolved above, and then you strengthen below the titillation with decent stricture; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is annexed to its neck, and it should be left, and not be bruised for seven days.
And it happens that the patient's food should be stopped little by little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring about their health.
And then the food should be given more abundantly, around seven or eight, and an exercise of movement should be done; and so if it is stopped and not softened, then it will be healthy.
Perhaps the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it happens that there should be administered a cautery with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament and joint are not stopped, and the emplaster and stricture are reduced over several times, and it is not stopped and you cannot elevate that arm to the upper parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either inscribed or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will not be fixed in its own place.
Regarding the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and knee or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And another stricture should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
If the disease settles into the limb with gravity and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many exhausted remedies within so that the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in the part in front of the part behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you, because it is evident from the misalignment or maladjustment according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, it is clearly declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that muscle.
And it is necessary to treat the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches a chronic state, because if it reaches a chronic state, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly can it be fully healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many exhausted remedies are used against that, which leads to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that its hand should be extended in two directions, and its arm should be expanded, and the muscles of the thigh are placed over the hip and below it, and the poultice envelops the joint with the tips of its own hands, or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that it bends its hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a vigorous extension and very strong force.
And it is necessary for two ministers to extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then return the arm to its whole part, because it is enveloped by a doubled cloth wrapped long over its hand, or bandage.
And when the thigh touches the joint with its hand, until it has some oil for so that it is those causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then envelop the joint with a strong poultice until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is necessary to be placed on that plaster in which it is stipulated and exception made in album of Houour, and it is extended in a strict descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the pillar, and left for some days.
And then it is dislocated; and so if the joint is formed in its own place, then you loosen the bandage of it and leave it thus.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it thus for some days until it is fully strengthened; and then loosen it.
But if it happens that the gravity falls on the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint alleviated, so it is anointed with a thick ointment; and then it is bound, and leave it thus on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over that alleviated, so it is rounded by motion, once, and the second, and the third. in the instrument of bath, until it is cleaned.
And if you want, pause over that moist and scaled wound with border and stretch over that; and do some remedies, because it is moist and reduces to its own disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and on the contrary it is of other joints, but especially it is necessary that there be velocity in the reduction of it at the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place becomes chronic or falls into a chronic state.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that, and the thigh places its hand or its palm over the vicinity of the joint, and envelops it until it returns to its own place.
But especially it is necessary that it be considered if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that minister is precisely over the table, so that the hand of the thigh falls upon that vicinity of the joint.
Therefore, if you return immediately, it is good; and if not, then the abscess will become worse, and it will be difficult to cure; and do not delay, because if you do not, you will not suffer nor have relief from the reduction of the pus that passes in a few days.
Perhaps the Roman Emperor's joint is twisted according to its crookedness; and do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold any cause; then you know that the nerves are pinched or crushed, and then it is not born in them unless they are strengthened with a pointed cautery for the correction of their case and fortifying their confidence.
Then when the illness is returned, then stop on the abscess which we have recommended, and it will be laid down and strengthened for five days; and then it will be dislocated and laid down, and the patient's hand will be exercised.
Perhaps if the movement of it is stopped and accidently falls into some gravity, then there will be a flow of water and friction of certain evacuated things, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Certain evacuated things dislocate the toes completely apart.
And when a toe among those is dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then hold the toe and push back the dislocation with the tied fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it in a way that the part which is dislocated is released, and leave it like that for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out in that same week.
And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dislocate it during the day and exercise its movement, and lay it at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it in that same part and do the first operation again, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Chapter 30.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure, because death will come to the patient.
And it is said that the evacuation of the patient's effort is outside their will, and cannot retain it; and many evacuated things are softened in certain members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebrae is removed from its place, because many evacuated things are removed and many evacuated things make the removal of those into four parts.
Then that has been removed to the back parts and is named paralysis.
Perhaps the cure of it is that then you consider if the paralysis occurs from weakness, because then there is no cure nor complete healing of that.
Perhaps in that which is seen by chance or by percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients discovered the ways of cure with verbose sermons, from which I will return to profit; perhaps you have already been freed from that from which I have little excuse for the trouble of it, by my own proximity to the intent of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments of that which I will show you and expand upon.
And of those there is no cure except for that which occurs on the back properly, as I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face above a soft bed prop against the wall, and should be extended below with a moderate pillow so that the feet of it are not lifted.
And then a straight beam should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around the head of it, and another beam in the air above the feet of it on the other end of the bed.
And the minister holds the beam, and is not fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and below the thin linen band firmly; and extend the end of the linen to the beam which is above the head of it, and lay that on it; and then strengthen the other band around the thighs of it at the knees, and its legs; and then adjust all the bands and lay them on the other beam which is above the feet of it.
And then the minister should carefully extend the band to the part of the beam, and do not remove the two beams and the bands from their places in which they are fixed, perhaps because it is not firmly held as I have said.
The doctor stops his hands on the spine for strength to return, or he stops on that one table, and then adjusts on the table his six feet to return.
Perhaps it does not return in this way, then take a table on which the width or length is in the air of three handbreadths, and hollow out the wall of which we have said is proper for the patient a place where the extremity of the table enters. And then stop the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor stops his six feet on the other extremity, and stretches well until the spine is straightened and returns to its own place.
And if you want, uncover what has been turned around in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground the head of the patient in the back of two wooden posts, the length of which is one arm, and from the head to the back of two wooden posts; and let the length be between each post a palm, and already it is done in each post a hole where the corpse turns, and each one is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round post in which it turns, and let it be turned around the two holes of the two wooden posts.
And at the extremity of it there is a hole in which the post is formed, the length of which is one palm in water where it turns; and in the two other wooden posts it is similar to that.
And then stretch the ligaments that have been stretched on the chest of the patient in the hole where it is beneath the head of him, and the ligaments that have been stretched on his thighs in the turning post where it is beneath his feet.
And then there is someone who turns the post and stands as a minister who holds the post with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
And then since the spine is returned, and the place is straightened, then cover that you stop applying excruciating plaster in album of egg white, and then stop; and then stop on the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gibbosity, and on the part of the spine above.
And then let it be relaxed in the ligament which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nutrient until he is healthy.
And if some impediment remains in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that medicines which mollify and linseed are administered on the table for long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a thin layer of lead.
And some vegetables accidents occur in the back of the two spines, and it is judged for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already warns you so that you do not cover that it is done with a prognosis to him at this medicine, because very far from making you accede death.
Chapter 21.
On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not deviate except for dislocation only, and they do not accede to those which accede to the other small joints with motion and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and little to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it to the inner parts is this, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is then longer and the denudation is more evident than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the ground, and it is the place where the ligament is apostematized by apostema caut, so that the head of the thigh has already been perverted here.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that it expands the leg in a complement, but however it does not bend because of the pain that is in the denudation, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot walk on that to the front parts; and its urine is retained and its ligament is apostematized, and from there the ambulation of it is above the ankle.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the back parts is that it does not expand the denudation, nor can it bend the ligament that bends the knee, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the ligament is mollified, and the head of the thigh is at that place.
Perhaps reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been antiquated with what you have administered reduction of it and according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore it does not cover that it has been made a prognosis.
In that case where the dislocation is recent, it is one of the four species of dislocations, then you should strive to reduce it to its natural position and extend it to the anterior and posterior parts, and move it to the right and left sides, because a strong return is not indicative of another cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the patient from behind, or hold their hands, or bind what is placed on the leg beneath the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one below so that they hold the patient's hands beneath the thigh; and you should strengthen the bond around the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to extend the extremity of the joint.
And it is an extension of it or from the anterior to the angle at the part of the elbow, or from the posterior to the part of the back.
And it is the extension of all those in a way that the patient is elevated with their seat off the ground and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that require their own cure.
In the reduction of it itself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the anterior parts, you should resupinate the patient on their back; and then pause with the bonds around the joint of the thigh at that place where the head of the thigh and the space beneath the elbow meet; and then extend the bond from the part of the elbow to the further posterior part of the back.
And then another strong minister takes hold of the arms of it, and grasps the large space of the patient's thigh and extends to the anterior parts for vigorous extension, because that returns to its natural place.
And this species is of lighter cure in which this member is reduced more easily than the other species.
But if it is excused regarding you and does not obey the entrance in this species of cure altogether, then you should tie both feet of the patient strongly, lightly, over both heels and both knees.
And it is the length of each one by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the bed, and it should be in a massage; and it is the length of it from the ground by the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh, and it is suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh in strong empirical force, because the joint returns to its natural place with velocity.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the anterior part, you should make the patient sit on a low seat as we have recommended in the previous chapter; and strengthen the bond around the patient's leg properly and around their feet.
And then two stools are placed, one at the patient's feet, and the other at the head; and then two adjusted stools are placed beside the middle of the bed, on which drapes are enveloping, so that the patient is not damaged by the stool being between their thighs, so that the extension to the posterior parts is not disturbed.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with their hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then you should make the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on bed; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's elbow, and then bends that with the other hand, and in that bending pause, extend to the posterior part at the back of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then you should not make the patient be extended to the posterior part, and it is elevated from the ground; but you should make it pause on a hard surface, thus as you make the examination if the ankle of it is dislocated to the anterior part, according to what we have said about the examination of it on two anchors; and it is on their face and the bonds are extended, according to what we have said, there is no failure.
And you should make an administrative compression on the table above the place where the joint is.
Then, when the reduction is completed according to what you should do  and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those bonds and the patient's leg is strengthened and expands, then you know that the member has returned as it should be  and then you adjust both thighs and pause with a bandage and strengthen with a splint thus that the ankle is not hidden in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see those signs in the examination, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore leave the patient to rest afterwards.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster it, and stretch it according to its first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then release it, and make it walk on crutches over several days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated forward, and backward, and downward more than upward; and sometimes it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that it commands the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the shoulder joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is to make the patient straighten up, and if possible, extend their leg, placing their foot on the ground; then attach the two [pieces of] cloth to the face of it, and place their foot between them; and then make the shoulder joint return to its place with the help of your palms, holding them between the pieces of cloth above the shoulder joint with force, and another servant extends their foot until the shoulder joint returns to its position.
And the sign of reduction of it is that its leg adheres to the thigh without labor or effort.
And then plaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days, until they are healthy and comforted.
If the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments which are involved in the cure of the aforementioned injury.
Chapter 33.
On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Some ankle joints are removed by small movement, and some joints are dislocated according to their completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either backward or forward.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle becomes swollen preceding the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its movement is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facility and ease until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient straighten up, and hold that with a strong and valiant servant behind the two pieces of cloth on the middle place of it.
And then you put your right hand straightening the foot on the upper part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two inches, and then extend it with your left hand; and place the toes of the foot in a straight line from the leg.
And do that for two inches according to what we have counted.
And then place the toes of the foot on the leg at the third inch, and you are at the ankle.
Then if it returns to one inch or two according to this method, and if the foot becomes swollen, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
But if the reduction of it is prohibited with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their two feet on the ground, and stretch a pillow strongly on the ground, and place it between their thighs, and you have enveloped it with a cloth so that the patient does not move.
And then the servant of it holds its thighs, and then another servant extends the foot with their hands or with a ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and then extend that servant against extension of the foot, and the pillow is extended between the thighs of the patient retaining it, so that the body of it is not pulled towards the lower parts from its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns with facility.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause and plaster strongly, and bind the foot with a strong ligament to the leg.
And beware that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on it is not violent and holds it strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch it.
And you remove that from the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from strenuous activity for 40 days. Perhaps it is forgotten to administer that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not above it dissolved and corrupted, and then do not receive a cure.
And if you encounter a hot aposteme, then take care that you administer in the cooling of the water in which our narration precedes, in another place of cure and of wrapping, until it is relieved.
Chapter 34.
On the Cure of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
It is necessary that one who is dislocated be placed in a little extension of their trouble; and this is not difficult, because it is easier.
Perhaps the dislocation is in some nodes of the toe of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on the edge of a chair or on a table, and it should be standing thus as if it were a nave.
And then you stand on your feet, and stop the toe from going beyond what is imagined of the joints, and then calcify that which has gone to the toe until it returns, and see that it is already placed and does not appear in the eminent place.
And then stop putting the belly of the foot on a table that holds the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen that which is in structured decent firmness for three days; and then remove that and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the Species of Dislocation that are Caused by a Blow or a Fracture or any other Violent Means.
When you encounter some cause of those, and you persevere in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many successful outcomes will follow, far from death.
And for that it is not necessary to presume about the cure of the presument, but rather one who is skilled in the art, from long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that calm apostemes so much alone, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, not to the one to whom you hope for salvation, but rather from alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope. And then it is necessary to hasten so much to remove the cause at the beginning, because meanwhile an hot aposteme develops.
And then if the limb returns according to what we want, then administer a regimen that calms the hot aposteme and cures the wound with what is convenient for it among the dry desiccative remedies.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and you encounter separated bones, then you make the statement of theirs, and do in that what we have said about simple maladies of that which is preceded in the places of those.
And beware and avoid according to your prudence that which is intrumental in the ways of fear, according to what has been preceded in my predication; because it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your cosmos as they are in your time. Thus ends the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly full of those which God may bless. Amen.
