Oh, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, according to its conclusion and through my explanations and declarations, it appears to me that you will be able to grasp what I wish to convey to you in this treatise, which is a part of surgical operation.
Now the surgical operation is almost lost in our region and in our time, so that the science of it has perished, and its knowledge remains hidden; and there remain only a few brief descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted by many errors and obscurities, so that the intentions of it are closed off and its power and art are stretched out.
And it appears to me that you will revitalize the ancient order of this treatise through the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that, you should come with the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other tools of the work, as is necessary for addition to the declaration and preparation of what is to be done.
However, the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his own hand in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and requires its actor to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well, so that he could know the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and the arrangement of them; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their efflux.
And therefore says Hippocrates that with a small name one can accomplish much, but most of all in the work of the hand.
But we have already said this about him in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about anatomy as we have described it, will certainly fall into error by which men are killed, just as I have seen many of them, because some are formed in this science and then stray from that true science and experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor who had inserted an abscess into the throat of a woman, and had cut through some arteries in the throat, so that a great deal of blood flowed out and the woman died among others.
And I saw another doctor who told him to pull out a stone from a man's bladder, which he had processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and he extracted that stone with a piece of the intestines, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already cried out against it, and saw that because of the largeness of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew in advance that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and then operated on a blacksmith's leg which was broken in the joint; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pulleys and astels with strong tension, and did not give the wound any breath.
And then he loosened the bandage according to his desires, and then released the ligature, and then left it untied for some days, and commanded that we loosen the tie; and thus it happened that the joint and leg became inflamed, and ultimately led to perdition.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the tie, and he gained tranquility and eventually became free from his pains.
But however, corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained and did not cease to corrupt the member until the patient was endangered.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated within a few days, until the wickedness of it increased with its lord.
Which is because the cancerous tumor is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not need to be treated with iron throughout, but rather should be considered as a member which suffers from being totally attacked.
And therefore, children, it is necessary for you to divide the surgical operation into two parts: one is in the operation which is associated with health, and the other is in the work where danger lies in the greater dispositions.
And I have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is one in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this and avoid that, so that foolishness does not obstruct the way to speak and to deceive.
And therefore take your own arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your own patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best means by the grace of God to avoid losing health and the noble succession, and abandon the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and hold your own arms from this which makes you fear, so that your situation remains in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: because it is more remaining to your glory, and all the more in this world and forever in your sanctity.
Galen already said in some of his own writings: "Do not heal bad illnesses, because bad doctors are not named."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and the first part of the first chapter. The first chapter, arranged from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and ironwork of cauterization, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, wounds, and extraction of splinters and similar things, entirely chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on curing of torsion and similar things; chapter ordered from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
You should know the quality of the joints of that cauterization and the nonuments of it, and in what composition it is prohibited to cauterize.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of cauterization and its nonument is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secret and hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and among them there has been disagreement, and for my part, I will not venture to recount all their sermons, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cauterization agrees with all universal composition universally, which is in matter or its matter, except for two compositions, which are compositions without material.
In the dry and withered composition with material it will desiccate; because some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite of that, that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, for nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the diseased part, which is hot and dry, should be healed with heat and dryness.
And you will find that the one who says the opposite of that is wrong, for through cauterization it is made to heal in all hot and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men; because when you compare the human body and its humors with the composition of fire, you find the human body cold.
And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already shown me several times to uncover.
But however it is not necessary that what has already been explained and exercised in the chapter on cauterization should come again over this, for I have already known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of theirs, and the space of time of those.
But in other compositions, there is no fear for you, and most of all in cold and humid diseases, because already all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant in the treatment with cauterization in those.
And know, children, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it, there is something more about cauterization with medicine combined, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not affect except the member that is being cauterized, and does not harm another member adjusted to it but with a small injury.
But the action of combined medicine reaches that member which is distant from it, and very easily brings disease to a difficult-to-heal member and very easily causes harm.
But the fire, due to its sublimity and good substance, does not do this except in a superfluous way. And it is already known to us by experiment and the length of service in studying the art above the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused for the length of the sermon. But if it were not that it is not read in your free book in this pause, I would reveal to you a secret hidden with the fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, with a philosophical and demonstrative sermon, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cauterization and pause for the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at any time, because the harm caused by the accidental timing is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cauterization, and most of all if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared that those who bring evil may come, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
And thus it does not occur in your minds, or, children, that this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, for it is that to that disease which is healed by cauterization there is no reduction at all times, and they pause on the consequence.
And the cause is not thus as they say, for cauterization is nothing but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause why pains come.
But however, cauterization exceeds medicine by the will of its virtue and the grandeur of its lord.
And it is possible that its disease may return at some hour of time, according to the composition of the patient and the location of its disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the accumulation of superfluities there, and what has been gained through its acquisition in foods and similar causes; but if the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humors, as with cauterization for toothache and similar pains, it is possible that this pain will not return in full, but rather becomes small.
And it is also common saying that cauterization is the ultimate remedy of medicine, and it is a saying that is most true, not to what they understand in it, because they believe that there is no healing that is beneficial through medicine or any other cause approaching cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterization is the ultimate remedy of medicine not only when we administer the healing methods in some diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and approaching the end of the cause, one administers cauterization, and it proves to be beneficial. And from now on, know that cauterization is the ultimate remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand as common and foolish among doctors.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its sublime substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a difference, as it is not absolutely true, because you have already proven and proved that it does not make a difference in some bodies except for others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you do cauterization with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, because it is hidden according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and since you prepare to receive heat; and if you adjust above it ignition so that the gold melts in the fire, and the craftsman sees through the occupation of that.
And therefore it is necessary to perform cauterization with iron more lightly and more precisely in order to achieve the rightness of operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have organized those from head to foot, in order that the demanding one may be satisfied with it.
The First Chapter.
This cauterization is applied to the humidification and coldness on the upper part of the head, which has two causes: one cause being soda and another being a great flow of rheumatic fluid, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears that are fluent, and a great deal of sleepiness, and toothaches, and pain in the jaw, and universally all diseases that come through coldness, such as paralysis, sodomy, apoplexy, and similar things in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine in the morning, for three or four nights, according to what the disease demands and the age and habit of the patient.
And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and after that make a section between the hairs on top of his head, and place it on a well-crafted bench, so that he may rest his head on his own feet.
And then pause the razor's edge against the tip of your nose, right between the eyes. But when the fire is reached, mark that place with a tent, and then ignite the cauterization oil of which this is the form:
And then pause that oil on the marked place with a tent, in such a way that it descends, by which your own hand is gradually constrained, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see that some quantity of bone is already uncovered from the head, such as the amount of grain in errors, then raise your hand and if it is not returned to the iron, use another one that is not chilled, until what I have said to you is seen.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it sit for three days.
And then apply to it a poultice of beggar's ticks and let it sit on the wound until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with four-fold medicine, so that it may be healed.
And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it is for the cauterization to be applied, because it is more effective and beneficial.
And they said that some of them were cauterized in the cord into the bone, and kept the cauterization until it was absorbed by some part of the specificity of the bone.
And then be rubbed with that which is adapted to the bone, and then be cured.
And others said that with the cauterization, it will reach the end, until it presses strongly on the bone, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alfalfa. And they say that from that place, the fumes of the head will evaporate.
And then the open wound should be kept for a long time, and after that it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cauterization do not seem right at all, except in certain men according to the way of fear; and leave that, I say, is better for health when it is, because the head is revealed by solution of continuity, as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the patient's head is of a free nature.
And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better, as I say; and from that house and with that work, health ensues.
Second Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Head.
When in the entire head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of warps, cochias, capipurges, emplausters, guats, cadels, and gualinas, and similar things, and most especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not benefit him at all, then consider that whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in his nature; and if it is not free and finds a great deal of coldness, then he cauterizes another cautery, leaving just a little bit. And then cauterize that on the horn of his head with another cautery until the cord is parted. Cut the cord and have it revealed on the bone the quantity which we have recounted, and cauterize that with one cautery in the back part of the head, in the place called "vas", where the wind is paused. And let your hand be in that way, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient by this will feel a great deal of diverse pain different from all other head cauteries.
And you will say that this cautery is in its place, for it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than that which is used on the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Third Chapter.
On Cauterization for Headaches not Caused by Ancient Causes.
When headache occurs in the back part of the head, or it is spread into the eye, be evacuated with medicines in the morning, and administer another treatment, which I have said in the divisions of diseases; and if nothing benefits, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either by medicine acute and combined, or by iron.
But the cauterization by medicine combined is that you take a sweet of aloes, and soak it in water, and abscind the extremities of it from both ends. And then cut the location of pain in the temple with a blunt lancet until a small pit is made, and it is hidden.
And then apply it to the place with a stopper made of descending constriction, and leave it for three hours; and then remove it and treat the aloes, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then apply a poultice on top submerged in mud until the place becomes firm.
And then cure that with four-fold medicine, so that it may be healed.
And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines that I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
But the cauterization by iron, according to this manner: ignite by the cautery of which this is the form:
and it is called "claw's claw", because the head of it is like a shape of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small elevation.
And then place the iron on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that it is not absorbed by the cord that is left - and turn the small iron gradually with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is absorbed by the specificity of the cord is as great as the majority of it, and lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not absorbed, lest there come a flow of blood.
And then soak the poultice in saltwater and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a mullet poultice wrapped in mud, and then cure with four-fold medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the cutlery according to the cautery, and beware of cutting off an artery in this not ancient headache properly.
Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Ancient Headaches.
When you treat headaches with what we have said in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not benefit, and sometimes the disease is so severe that it does not reach the point where we have described the first cautery by medicine or by fire, then it is necessary to ignite the cutlery cautery until it is white, because you signify on the location of pain with a line of length which is most of the digit or what it may be; and place your hand for one moment and strengthen that until you cut off the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is modified by mastication, and that the lacrimal duct not be absorbed and the nerves that accompany that, and that no spasm ensues.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut off, for in the cutting off of it there is fear, and especially to him who ignores this process and does not study or practice; and leave the operation at the beginning.
And you will come to remember the regimen of accidental bleeding from the artery according to your own manner in this very book.
And if you see that this disease does not yield to this cautery and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with two handles, and this is the better cautery and most concurrent.
Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Earaches.
When in the ear there is pain caused by cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with other treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
And then apply the puncta to the ignition, and be brought around the entire ear as a wheel is revolved, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in each. And then stretch yourself with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little until you have marked the location with a tent.
And if the cautery of these dots is applied to the entire ear, and in each place, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Torture.
Torture which is cured and by cauterization it is not but of the species which come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torture with jarrings and capipurgisms and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not confirm, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first on the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And then pause your cautery on the contrary side of the ailing part, for softening does not come but on the opposite side that appears to be healing.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and in the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's joint, and then place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the cord's specific part is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is placed before us. But however subtle it may be, that a little bit is as you see it; and it is necessary to cut off the superfluous thickening a little.
And then cure the location with what is before us, until it is healed.
Seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with what we have said, and your treatment does not confirm, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with a cautery in the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with another one in the occiput. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what was previously said.
And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and this is the last one; and then it should be cured with what proceeds.
Eighth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Oblivion caused by Flux.
It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large jarrings and pills of purging medicines.
And then shave the head of the patient and apply an ointment to the occiput, as described in the treatise on ointments.
And pause it for a few days, because this is the manner of the cautery. And do so according to that order which I have already said.
And thus, if it is well healed by those means; and otherwise, then do so to the three cauteries in the back part of his head, which are descendants from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with what has proceeded.
But if you wish to add more and the patient is tolerating it well, then do so to the middle part; and if you wish for even greater addition, then immediately cauterize that on both horns.
And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive-colored according to the form previously given.
Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Take care to process the head with jarrings and with what we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with another one on all the horns of the head, and with another one on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of many and the patients are tolerating well, but the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with one cautery until the cord's movement of life is consumed, and lift up your hand. And then cure that until it is healed, and this be olive-colored cauterization.
Tenth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Epilepsy.
No is cauterized the epileptic, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
And thus, it is necessary to purge the brain of him at the beginning with jarrings and with other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant except for the exemption of medicines.
And if the child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarisms and mastiguoars as purgatives, before this for several days, with good food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another one on the occiput, and each horn of the head is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I say, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
And be olive-colored according to what has been previously said.
But if the patient is a child, then pause on a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Eleventh Chapter.
On Cauterization for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and flux is gross, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of it according to what has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a tortoise shell decently made of it over the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should be seated comfortably, and held by all parties.
And then apply a poultice; and it is more worthy of an ancient border of sheep's wool. And warm that over the fire with a tempered heat by measure, which said enough when it is more in it. And then put that in the middle part of the head of him in the circle, and let it be there until it is cooled.
And do this with the patient for a whole week once, with another regimen of it good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to what is most of it, so that you hold your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a species of cauterization which moistens the brain with equality.
And then put that in a cloth or in gray gauze, wrapped around it.
Twelfth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Water that Descends into the Headache.
When you are declared the beginning of water in the head for the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of it, and guard against all humidity.
And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two heads, or of one side if it is the beginning of water in one head.
And then cut all the veins and arteries that are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those and caution against bleeding.
And some times it is cauterized on the cervical vertebrae left between two bones with two cauteries gradually produced.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Old Tears.
When tears of the head are ancient and hardened through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place on the outside of the head, and it is verified that this is superfluous watery flux, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water descending into the head, and with a cautery in the middle part of the head and two cauteries in the cervical vertebrae left between two temples, and with two cauteries in the cervical vertebrae left between two bones. And if you need addition, then cauterize that on the entire back of the head above the forehead with a small cautery.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Stench of Nose.
When you treat that with water which we have said in the division and it does not improve your treatment, then prepare and give to drink to the patient the cohies for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize it with a white cautery and an olive-colored cautery. And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cautery and two cauteries on both forehead areas, just above the hairline.
And guard yourself from cutting into the artery, lest you hurt it.
And of the clove-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Softening of Eyelids of the Head.
When the eyelid of the head is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery having this lunary shape; and this is the form of it:
And if you wish, cauterize that on both forehead areas a little with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be extended from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the forehead.
And do not press too hard with your hand and the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is habituated.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Head when the skin is transformed into inner parts and pushes the head.
When the skin of the head is transformed into inner parts just as it pushes the head, then cauterize those in two manners, either by fire or by a medicine that combines.
If by a cautery of fire, command the patient beforehand to wash his skin thus as those who cleanse it, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you push that which makes them swell, then take away their swelling, you strengthen the head of him with a bandage so that it is not hurt until the skin is born.
Then when they are born and equalized, then pause the patient's head in your sight, and then sign on the eyelid of his head with a tenta, with a signal which is according to the figure of a mertal leaf, and let it be the beginning of the signal just above the skin.
And then put a cloth wrapped in alum or in mucilage of pellitory on the head.
And then ignite the cautery which is this shape of it.
And then cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the cord is burned just like a leaf of myrtle, all appearing properly.
And the sign of health from this work is that you see the eyelid of the head already contracted and the skin of it elevated above the point of the head.
And then elevate your hand and let it be for three days, and then pause on the cloth with a border until the scar is eradicated. And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns to the skin and causes swelling again, and the eyelid is softened, then do it again as you did first time.
But if the skin is in the eyelid left behind, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not push against the head.
But the cautery with a medicine that combines is what you command the patient to wash his skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a cloth of paper in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take one ounce of known salt and one ounce of living cause. The end! And thus it is, and then mix those causes well, and make this with a feast in order that it may not be cooled; and then spread water on the paper which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that over one head or both heads; and pause behind the head cloth wrapped in alum, and the patient's head be in your sight.
And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press it a little bit, but do not hurt it until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, because stinging is in it just like from fire.
And thus when the patient perceives that it is getting stinging, then pause the medicine and stop hurting it with your said thing; therefore when the stinging ceases, then wash away the medicine and rinse the head with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as washed by fire or incision, because you are satisfied; and if not, then go back to applying the medicine on the location where it has not yet taken effect and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the head is contracted.
And then pause on the cloth with a border until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or another substance until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep with diligent vigilance that the medicine does not fall on the head, and if the eyelid some days later becomes softened and some cause of skin pushes into the head, then iterate your medicine on that location where the eyelid has become softened, and just as you did at the beginning, and then apply it again until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And know that the heads of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
And may not be hidden the way of rectitude from him who studies in this art.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Lachrymal of the Head.
When you cure a fistula with the water that we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confirm your cure, then be it so that you cauterize that according to this manner: command the patient to pause his head in your sight, and hold his head by some minister between your hands in such a way that it is not hurt nor agitated with his own head.
And then put a cloth wrapped in alum or in mucilage of pellitory on the head of him.
And then ignite the cautery which is this shape:
the one that is curved, like the form of a reed or a pen nib of a writer, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, be penetrating into the other extremity. And if you want, let it be like a test.
But in any case, the one that is curved is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it out. And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the congealed matter from it.
And then pause on it the cautery which is well ignited, and apply that to your hand a little bit at the point of the head where the nose begins, so that you do not err with your hand or disturb the patient, and then pause the cautery on the gray hairs of the head and corrupt that.
And thus if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, it is well; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave that as is for three days, and then pause on that cloth with a border and surround it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
But if it is passed 11 days and it is not healed, then pause on the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is necessary in your own capital.
And there is another method of cauterization for a fistula which some of the first ones said: take the location of the fistula and fill it with that and pause in that fissure, just as subtle as its shape is. Pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and apply your hand with care with good retention, so that the patient is not hurt by the melted lead not reaching the head of him; and take care to pause on the head of the patient with a cloth wrapped in alum or water, because the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and healing, it is well; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a thrust of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to its proper location.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Wound of the Lips.
Many times these fissures occur on the lips, and mostly on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure these fissures with the water that we have said in the divisions and it does not improve your cure, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this shape which is seen:
And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a knife.
And then pause that initial cut cautiously in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with cerotes until it is healed.
Nineteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
When an abscess develops in the uvula or palate or in the roots of the teeth and bursts, and then becomes old and forms a fistula, and you cure that but it doesn't improve, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity received by the fistula, and apply that ignited thing into the track of the fistula, and take your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end do it once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said about healing until it is healed.
And thus if the pus is discharged and is healed, it is well; and otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what is written in its capital.
Twentieth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines but do not confirm it, then pause the patient's head in your sight, and then ignite the cautery in the shape which will be shown to you, so that you pause the quill on the tooth and insert the hot cautery into it hastefully, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then lift your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times as you wish.
And then have the patient open his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and then stop it, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Twenty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is a worm or frost in it, or if the cure with medicine does not confirm, then use two methods of cauterization: either with the border of cows, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder is when you take the border of cows and boil it in copper, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the tent, and then immerse that in boiling border, and pause that on the painful tooth hastefully until it is cooled down.
And then iterate that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge cloth or cotton in the boiling border as said above, and pause that on the painful tooth, and pause over that hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But in any case, the cauterization with fire is that you attend to the quill of iron or copper, and it be in the heart of it some roughness, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the shape which will be shown, and pause that on the tooth and take your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times until the pain is relented or the next day.
And it is necessary that through the impression of that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good border and keeps it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as you wish, at the extremity, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the quill:
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Extrophuli.
When extrophuli are full of flesh and cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines, and you wish to facilitate their digestion lightly, then you ignite the cautery in a curved shape as follows, having two extremities with humps so that the smoke from the cautery rises from one extremity, and pause that hot thing on the abscess once or twice, or if needed more times, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days and pause over that cloth wrapped in border until what the fire has burned away is renewed.
And then cure that with ointment and tents and cloths until it is healed.
Twenty-Third Chapter.
On Cauterization of Hoarseness and Constriction of the Throat.
When the humors come out on the throat of the lung, and mostly when this is due to coldness of congestion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that at the root of the goiter in the depremented location.
And beware that you do not reach the goiter with the cautery nor burn away its code, but only a little.
And then cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it. And the cautery of it be claw-like, following the previous manner.
And then cure that with water which is preceded by it until it is healed.
Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors and the patient does not have fever or phlegm, but is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the depremented locations, one above and one below; and with another cautery in the middle location of the feet between two mamillae; and let the cautery be claw-like according to the previous form.
And if you wish, then be your cauterization punciform with the cauteries that are called puncta, in the shape which precedes in the puncturing of earache.
And be points inserted into those, and then cure that with water which is preceded by it until it is healed.
And already the cauteries have three humps where cauterization is done with that: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Titillation which is the head of the Help.
When the head of the Help is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not remain fixed in its return moment, and then for a small movement it becomes dislocated again, just as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first, and then the patient should be returned to their original position or onto their right or left side; and then elevate the code which is in the posterior part of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand if the juncture is dislocated towards the back.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the code so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be like this: with four heads of cauteries.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cautery with porous citruses and salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be decayed for any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and tartness is made there, then it is necessary to cauterize on the muscle with claw-like cautery or with pointed puncture cauteries, because the juncture is confirmed and the moisture is dried up and the patient is healed.
Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold humors come out in the stomach and many moistures are multiplied there, and if you continue the methods of healing and do not confirm it, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their legs extended and their clothes loosened, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one leaving a space for the foot as long as the width of a finger with claw-like cautery, and two cauteries leaving the sides of the stomach, so that the figure of triangular cauterization is formed; and elongate between them so that they do not intersect and cause pressure.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the code.
And the figure of the cautery will be according to this form, with addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and that will be one cautery according to the shape of a circle, according to this form:
And then cauterize the stomach punctiform to that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point by point according to what you wish with tent, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the healing which precedes it until it is healed.
Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Frozen Feet.
When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or moisture or excessive ventilation so that it departs from its normal state by excessive excretion, and the patient is not cured with the water which we have said, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their head elevated, and sense three cauteries according to this form and this quantity mixed with tent, and place them on the foot left of the hip bones, where the man's position lies.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be placed according to the length of the right arm.
And do not compress your hand with the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the maturity of the codena, and not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then lie down, which has already stretched out its clothes, and elevate its arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize those cauteries with a cutlery-like cautery, when it is according to your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the code be absorbed so that it is absorbed into the whole body and reaches within the veins, for the code here is subtle; and know this.
Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On Perforation of Abscess on the Foot with a Cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will have a heavy and intense pain.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, with great pain and at times that fatigues even the physicians with its cure.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their head elevated; and then sense the location of the abscess with tent; and then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rag, the form of which has been preceded in the other page. And then cauterize with that and cautery until all the code is burned away, until it reaches the bone, until in which you will see healing.
And then cure that with the healing of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization unless one has studied in the art of medicine and many diseases have been known; but rather, try it occasionally with some boldness, but always leave room for doubt, and that is better.
Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Pleurisy.
They will say that the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology are made for pleurisy with a coldness according to this manner, and it is this: take one root of aristology, long and dry, which is found, and be of the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a small cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one slightly declining towards the side below the beard, and another two cauteries declinating between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly behind; and another one in the middle of the foot; and another one on the stomach; and three small cauteries on the back; and one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders; and two small cauteries from both sides of the foot, leaving out the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifest of the code in work.
And already some ancient ones have said that they are also some of the men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and place it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess and is purged with pus, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for when it happens soon after it becomes a fistula which does not lead to healing.
Thirtieth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Melancholy.
When you cure the disease of melancholy with the water which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then cauterize in that place according to three ways, all of which are purgative, of which one is to make three or four lines running along the length of the melancholy, just as the figure of the cauteries on the foot has preceded.
And let the thickness between each cautery be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be elevated on their back.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two wick-like ends, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the end part of the melancholy, where the patient's left side becomes quiet.
And let your elevation be the one by which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the latitude of the body.
And then insert the two wick-like ends, ignite them slowly, into that which you will pierce with the code from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three wick-like ends.
And then cure the cautery more than it has already laid down of getting worse for too many days, because it is more certain that the other previous causes are in the cure.
Thirty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization of Hydrocephaly.
Cauteries are not used in hydrocephaly, but rather on the proper part alone.
When you cure the hydrocephalus with the methods of healing which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that one cauterizes with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the melancholy, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the subtlety of the code.
And then leave the cautery untouched for such a time that it may become worse over a long period.
And do not evacuate the patient from the cure near the cautery with water which is necessary for two intentions, and be hastened to him with the help of healing.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claw-like according to its previous shape, and it is that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Feet and Shoes.
When the feet are abscessed in hydrophobia and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary that you cauterize the feet on the back of the heel with a cautery in nocturnal water which is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to all, because the stagnant water resists.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries on each shoe, and in each shoe make a cautery at the extremity of the claw-like cautery. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the shoe: one at the toe and the other at the middle of the shoe; and on each shoe, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without healing for a long time because some water will ooze out from it.
And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Thirty-Third Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Belly.
When the belly is afflicted by cold and moisture so that the virtues are debilitated, it is necessary to exhibit virtue to show that the patient will suffer from a cautery. Then cauterize that with a great cautery on the patient's stomach according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circle cautery and four small cauteries in the navel subtils, with claw-like cautery subtlety; and with a cautery over the skin over the aloes grand, or two cauteries.
And if the humidities are excessive and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the intestines and over the bowels, and slightly adjusting two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, because it is a perfect cure of which you will not err.
Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
When in nature old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted moistures come to an end, and are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confirm the patient's cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left between the vertebrae of the small back and small triangular, and with a cautery above the navel which falls by two fingers.
And if you think that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food not digested, and their face often abscessed, then cauterize that on the stomach with a great cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery on the foot, and another on the melancholy of them with a claw-like cautery, and leave the cautery untouched for some time open, and then cure them until they are healed.
Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Athletes near the Abscession of Their Wounds.
When you abscess athletes, then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Then insert that ignited cautery into the abscessed athlete, and finally rest your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And make it once or twice, for if athletes are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and finally cure those with what confirms their wounds until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a great cautery on someone, it is more certain in judgment.
Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistulas that are made in the natural parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with a cautery.
Therefore, when one has some fistula in the natural parts which is old and corrupt, with pus and corrupted moistures, and therefore what is most worthy that it cures is to probe that with a subtle tent, and then know the quantity of its depth with the preceding said tent.
Then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a ray. And then place that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tent has penetrated.
And repeat the cautery on that until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one, two, or three sessions, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or bowel, then beware of all those places; and do not make it so unless the fistula is in a fleshy and palpable place that is not penetrating.
And then cure the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and all materials have abscessed from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it has been fully cured.
And if the materials are not gone from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prone position of corrupting one's flesh, or falls into those causes of which a reminder will come in its place.
Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Tonsils.
When in the tonsils there is pain from cold or from excessive ventilation, and because of this the patient's throat is dry, then it is necessary that you cauterize that on the tonsils with a cautery on each tonil with a claw-like cautery of which the remembrance precedes.
And then cauterize with a small cautery in the second one, so that three lined-up cauteries will come to be, and therefore they will be more certain in judgment.
Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Bladder.
When debilitation and mollification occur in the bladder due to cold and moistures such that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the most posterior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the intestines begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of the bones of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the most lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let it be a claw-like cautery according to what has been processed.
Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Shoulder.
When cold and moistures come to the shoulder, and because of this, there is no preoccupation, and the menstrual cycles are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and it happens that pain occurs in the movement of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the most posterior part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be claw-like.
Fortieth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Hip.
When moistures are effused into the part of the hip, and are caused by the symptoms of the same place, and a sign of it is that the shoe is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is found in the quarter where the buttock lies.
Then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cautery resembling a circle, as you have marked with a tent in the circuit of the same part, and because the part falls into the middle of the circle.
And let it be the cautery whose form preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not with you at hand, then cauterize that with three cauteries and one large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the code; and then cure that until it is healed.
Forty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the hip, and its cause is cold and moistures, the patient is cured with what we have said and does not confirm, and this is old, then it is necessary that you release the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
And the method of the cautery in that is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines or a cautery with fire.
There are two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that on the part of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make good depth in those. And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
But sometimes there are four cauteries on the middle part of the hip, so that they are on the head of the anquana.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that it may be a circular container and burn away the subtlety of all the code.
And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and not extended into the coss.
But if it is extended into the coss, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the coss on the spot where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers a little above the hairy part.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the subtlety of the code.
And if the patient says that the pain is extended into the place near the big toes, then cauterize that here where it hurts with a cautery for three or four points, or more if needed.
And if the patient says that the pain is below the donal bone near the coss, then cauterize that here with one cutaneous cautery.
And be careful in all cautery that you do not leave the cautery until you burn nerves or large arteries, and because of this, it may harm your patient more than it helps.
And I have seen one or another of those which you will cauterize on the hip and ultimately in the cautery, and the inflated fire burning inside until the tumor reaches the top, and the perforated and corrupted foot. And thus there will be a sudden solution of the stomach, and thus also death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And thus the wise men say in the cauterization of the hip, that this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron, the circumference being half of a palm; and let the opening be according to the thickness of an almond or slightly less.
And in the center of that circle be another circle; and let the space between them be the quantity of the bones of the foot; and be those circles about two parts; and let their length be one bone or two bones, and make in those margins a decent iron clothing in the circles; and this is the form of it:
And let it be ignited in the fire until it reddens and produces sparks, and then let it rest on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side. And therefore cauterize that with three circular cauteries in one go.
And then let that rest for three days, apply an emplaster to it with a border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have used but few times because of the terror of the regard for it, and therefore few of those who look upon it.
But of the best cauteries to that place which suffered them, and finds with it the location of the same.
But the cautery with medicines that adhesions, is that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which they should be placed the guaffo of the door of iron; let the length of the walls be in the naughtiness of theirs be two bones or as many as those.
And if the space between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and be above and below, and be that they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then let it rest on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side, and press your hand on the part of the hip; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually, and let it stay for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient's mordication and adjustment of it - because that atrocity is as if from fire - until the mordication ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the hot water from all of the hip with lukewarm water.
And then let it rest for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjustment is renewed, and let it rest again for some days, and flow from it purulence; this is the final in judgment.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the coss or the leg, make it so in that location where it contains water according to what is done in the hip in equal measure.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of causes not extinct in both parts, one on each side, and mix them together and pause in a new bowl of which the left part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the ray.
And pause the bottom of one bowl in another bowl filled with lukewarm water, and pour upon that alkali and living causes of hot water which absorbs them by a finger, and then press those with your thumb for good compression, and let the hole that descends from the sharp water into the left part of the bowl filled with lukewarm water.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkali renewed, for those things are now of great fiery intensity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation does by fire.
And thus of some medicines with which the hip is cauterized, such as turpentine and manna, and causes with saffron, mixed together in a way that they are blended.
And Gualia recounts the story of a man from ancient times who underwent an operation and cure with which he was cured of hip pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnified much about that, saying that there was no need for another cure, and since he was healed in one go just as recommended, because it was very easy to do so.
And thus it is that he is pressed with a certain type of vertebra, and if not found to be green, then he is pressed with a recent fig tree; and much is mixed with a little bit of gray and is paused on the hip where there is pain, or in the coss, or in the leg, and is tied.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient gives up the adjustment.
And then put it in water and thus when the body of him is reddenated, enter that into the earth, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use this cautery with these medicines except in the case of evacuation from the body.
But already Escorides has said that when there is a wound in the goat's vein, it is cauterized by afflicting the moon; and let the cautery be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dried goat's skin and inflame it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and let the cautery be done by placing the charcoal on the wool and letting it extend. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the mordication reaches into the hip and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called "cauteri de vaquas".
Chapter XLII.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
At times pain is in the two parts due to numerous causes, such as by falling or striking or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, namely the infusion of wet and humid matter.
And let it not be cut off except in this one species which is made by effusion of wet matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with bitter pills and similar ones, which are made on the two parts where there is pain three lines according to their latitude, so that each line has one or more cauteries, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the remedy.
And let it be a cauterization with pinpoint cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries at the medial point of the claw according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gillyosity.
Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their structure in the leg, causing elevation and movement.
And it appears in the last vertebra of the back and in the bones of the neck that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is a circle according to this form: that takes the cautery on all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with pinpoint cautery two or three lines. And let the points be proper between them.
And then cure that place until it is healed with what we have said.
But be careful not to administer a cautery in gilbosity that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On Cauterization of Gout and Pain in Joints.
When pains in joints are caused by wet humors which are lodged in each member of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this condition gout properly.
And therefore since gout caused by wet humors is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not renewed, then one must recauterize them.
And so you cauterize that place with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, whose form is as follows:
And if it is necessary that points be made on the sole of the foot, then make them with a pinpoint cautery. And if the pains rise into the tendons or to other joints, and many times it becomes established, then cauterize that place on each tendon with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed, as these cauteries are to you necessary, then cauterize that place and do not press too hard with the cautery before, so that it is only around the subtlety of the code.
And if the pains rise into the tendon and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its own chapter.
And if the pains are only in the mass and is called syringa, then point in the circle of the tendons as they revolve, pointing to those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said joints, then point in the circle of the tendons on each bone and on the pinch of the hand.
And if the pains rise to nearby days in the hips or muscles, then cauterize all of them on all parts of the aids.
And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is made a good regimen and the flux is evacuated by this cautery, then it will be healed, God help.
Chapter XLV.
On Cauterization of Wounds.
When an open wound appears in the groin and says goodbye to the navel, and this is where it begins to approach, then you must tell the patient to stop eating for a day and to use soothing causes so that the wound will descend from its belly.
And then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their arm bent until there is a hole or the cord or the bag appears.
And then return that place with your said fingers and signal the rupture over the bone of the shoulder blade, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the middle of a circle on the divided parts of the chest.
And then ignite the cautery which has this form:
until it is but a small spark and gives out sparks. And then reduce the bag or cord to its natural size, and then place your hand on the location so that the bag does not burst.
And you have placed between the patient's cosses and left one there to rest, another serves on his legs, and another on his feet, which has its own masses.
And then pause the cautery on that signal with your hand holding the cautery straight, and place it there until you reach the bone of the shoulder blade in the middle of the dueduni; and repeat that procedure another time if you did not achieve it in the first instance into the bone.
And observe wisely the shape of the bag at the time of your cautery, lest you burn that bag and the patient comes to harm or great evil.
And know that when you are applying the cautery do not touch the bone, nor compromise your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their age and measure.
And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar of fire is renewed.
And then cure that place with other remedies until it is healed.
And the patient lies on their back for 40 days until the wound and the plague are sealed.
And it is necessary that you pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of time of their cure, which stretches their belly, and that the bag does not burst forth from the effort to heal.
And then, after 40 days, gradually administer a decrease in the remedy, and keep it thus for another 40 days.
And thus be reduced in work and replenishment of food and drink, and in violent voices, because when you use this regimen of entire healing, it will be healed.
And I say the cure for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and thus at first, and you wish not to delay, then cauterize the rupture with that redon-shaped cautery according to its quantity, and it is this which is exhorted from the code just as the third part of it; and then cure that place with what we have said, and do not adjust.
And it has already been said by some firsts that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signaled in the attempt:
and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the hip above the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On Cauterization of Twist.
When an injury occurs in some member by falling or striking and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to cure with medicines, then it is necessary that you cauterize with pinpoint cautery.
And it is the cautery of each member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and revelation, location of twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good is; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary with those pains to be punctured in the member that approaches the one, so that you must achieve those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On Cauterization of Leprosy.
The lepers sometimes require cauterization for a great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy is made by the putridity of blood and melancholy.
And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that place, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor stopped, and fear for the patient that corruption will encompass all of their body and all its composition, then cauterize it on the head with seven cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second a little behind, up to the forehead; and two on each earlobe; and one behind, on the back of the neck or the nape.
And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little bit until it presses on the bone and leaves a small impression, and from there the scabs are dislodged, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from them; and cauterize over the swelling according to what has been said.
And if the leprosy has already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize that place with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on both elbow joints, and two on both vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one great one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx itself, and two on each hip joint, and one on each hip, and two on each ankle, and one on each toe, and two on each calf, and one on each muscle, and two on each tendons of the legs; and cauterize that place on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the tendons of their arms.
And beware of the nerves which are on the ankle, lest you burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the shoulder blade and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and conformable it is; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they do in their own flesh, because their body has already been stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as is preceded by the species of instruments.
And then cure the cautery with flour of earthworms mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On Cauterization of Stupor.
When some member is stuporized or drowsy and is cured with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healed, then you must cauterize that member with cauteries according to its magnitude or smallness.
And your cautery should enter the subtlety of the code a little bit. And then cure that place with remedies until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and in the vertebrae of the back, and the tension of the nerves which govern that member is released, and the stupor is renewed.
But do not presume on this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On Cauterization of Moles that are Morfa.
When moles are old and do not yield to any of the remedies of medicine, then you must cauterize over them with a preon-shaped cautery a little bit according to the quantity of the subtlety of the code, until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color of it is changed.
And then cure that place with flour of earthworms and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of pigeon or the blood of swallow, each being one part and all being mixed together; and apply a cloth and place it on the location until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On Cauterization of Crabs.
When cancer is beginning and you want to cut it out, then cauterize that place with a circle-shaped cautery in the circuit of it just as it revolves.
And they say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me, I have not seen this, for I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is better to be cauterized in the circuit of it with a circle just as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter LI.
On Cauterization of Adulterations.
When some adulterations are delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluity making it so, or because of the condition of the patient, which is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of adulterations; then cauterize in the circuit of it with many small punctate cauteries; and then let that be as it will mature in its proper time.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and place that in the middle location of the adulterations until the code pierces.
And if the cautery is applied in that location which is more behind, because the body of the arm is relieved; and then cure that place until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
On Cauterization of Corrosions.
Corrosion is corruption that walks in the member, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a location where it is suitable for cautery with fire, then ignite small to great number of claw-shaped cauteries, and apply them according to what is convenient in that location where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize that place entirely until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
And then leave that place alone for three days, and pause over the locations that have been cauterized with a mixture of oil and soap until all the scars are eradicated and all corruption is removed.
And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy and there is no corruption in it, good is; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains in the corrupted areas.
And corrosion is treated with some sharp medicines, because it is a halfway point between cautery and medicine. But however, cautery by fire is of greater benefit.
And I have already said the cure with sharp medicine in the division; therefore take it when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
On Cauterization of Knots and other Similarities.
Many times there is a growth in the leftover parts of the foot that is called a knot, and it is a big, deep cause which lames the foot; and cautery is done on those according to two methods, that is, with fire and with hot water.
But the cautery with fire is when you ignite the concave-like cauteri resembling a small wheel, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the knot of all parts, and it should be of fine margins.
And then pause that which is ignited over the knot, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the knot until the cautery reaches the depth of the knot. And then leave that place alone for three days until the knot begins to fall off. And then apply that place with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on that place for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times it occurs on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and legs, then you must administer cauterization with water, and this is done by taking a hollow reed or iron rod or a wheel-shaped piece, and placing that on the knot; and then take a small quantity of hot water, and pour it into the canula, and hold your hand, and revolve that with compression of your hand all over, so that the margin of the canula is pressed against the root of the knot, and let the hot water flow back through the reed to the root of the cau; and wait for the patient a little while for the mordicating effect of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, because the knot with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do this to those and the other one until you come to all of them on whose body it is.
And then cure those places where the roots of the knots are eradicated with this water of remedies which causes flesh to regenerate.
Chapter LIV.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When there is a tremor due to fright in the nerves or due to fever caused by fright, or for another similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize that place with four or five cauteries placed between each vertebra of the back; and with one cautery on the legs and over the stomach of the patient, with an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor ceases and hastens the recovery of the patient from the frightful illness.
Chapter LV.
On Cauterization of Accidental White Spots on the Body.
When white spots are formed on the body and pustules burst open which are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore it is necessary at first as it appears, that a subtle cautery be applied to the head of the fistula with a myrtle-shaped cauteri whose end is extended in fire; or with the roots of long-lasting erestology; or with a lentecular cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and do not believe, and the superfluity making those things ceases, and cures those.
But however, it is necessary that this be done properly with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding due to Incision of Artery.
Many times there is bleeding from an artery which is cut by the wound or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries on the member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that bleeding.
Therefore, as it happens with some water, then you must take your hand to the orifice of the artery and place on that the said cauteri, and apply it many times until the bleeding stops and there is no more.
And then pause in the fire with small and large olive-shaped cauteries, by number of points, and blow over them until they are thoroughly ignited.
And then take one small or one large cautery from those, according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, and place it on that vein hastening more than you have previously applied the said cautery, until the bleeding is stopped and contained.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the said cautery and extinguish it, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is stopped.
And beware that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that you bring other evil upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of it are burned and the bleeding is stopped, or that it be tied with thread or ligament by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the virtue of restricting blood flow be applied to it; and they must be strengthened with a poultice and decent constriction.
But he who administers restraint by way of ligament and constriction with cloths or by position of causes that burn and similar things does not yield quickly.
But if this happens in some place and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work with a pause of the said cautery on the orifice of that vein just as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the bleeding stops from the highest part of the wound, and over the artery let it not be removed; and on the artery be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and further in what has to do with cauteri or medicine needed.
On Incision, Perforation, Ventoses, Phlebotomy, Wounds and their Similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is suitable and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those things in the forms of cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters of the subordination of the head to the feet.
And you will proceed in this chapter by that same manner, so that it may be helpful to the one seeking it, namely on what he has requested.
And before you begin this, it is necessary, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is about terror, which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And therefore it is necessary that there be great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs, which is with blood, and to which life belongs, and so the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the apostema or warning of existence or purification of the wound or extraction of splinter or incision of peyra and their similar things. And among all those, there is accompanied fear and trembling, and in most of them death.
And you are warned that this should not fall on you, because sometimes the case requires the methods of men with many diseases. And some of them flee from their disease and it is light for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of this that they find in their disease, and due to the length of their illness, and with the disease there is fear which means death.
And one of them is the one who gives you their property and wealth, while you are expecting their health, and their disease is deadly.
And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any cause about this without proper certain science which verifies what you are, and by which you will have a praiseworthy succession.
And use in the cure of all your diseases prognosis and indication from that which is converted to health, for in that is aid to you on acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires his understanding in you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in his hand.
And you have arranged this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be helpful to you in what you request and need.
Chapter I.
On the Cure of Water which is contained in the Head of Children.
Know that this disease often occurs in children, especially during childbirth, when the midwife tightens the child's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this disease except in children; and all those whom I have seen have been brought to the point of death, and thus it has been shown to me as a work that is left undone in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water overflowed, and the head of him was always thus magnificently swollen to the point where it could not be contained on its own, but rather increased in moisture until it became hot death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the vertebrae and the bone, or accumulates behind the bone above the spine.
For the operation in that case if the moisture is between the vertebrae and the bone and the apostema is slight, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be two nights so that the moisture may flow, and this is the form of the spatum:
And therefore if the moisture is further increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions in this manner:
And if the moisture is behind the bone, then the sign of it is that you should cut open the commissures of the head from all sides and the water will be squeezed out when you compress that with your hand on the parts inside and it is not hidden from you. It is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:
And then apply the incision and extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and then envelop this in a wrapping of vinegar and oil for five days, and then release the ligament and cure the wound with tentas and enguentz, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of incision, which you should consider according to the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the replenishment of water, and make it so that it is most suitable for you.
And observe that you should not incise the artery and thereby cause bleeding of blood, and let the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Chapter III.
When it happens to some that they have catarrhs or wounds in the eyes or feet, and this is old-fashioned, and does not conform with the cure of medicines, then the final cure in this case is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's head swells, and then gently rub the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulsates; and the locations of each over the locations which are near the ears, repressed, and only in some men.
And then sign on the artery with a tentacle, and then incise each one with the spatula of each side approaching to the bone, and be it so for the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, enter the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incisions on each side.
And be the length of the incision about two inches adjusted, for when some vein is incised, the blood flows out with pulsatile egression, which jumps forth frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary for you to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then sign with a tentacle, and enter into the bone.
And as much blood as is needed to be gotten is one vessel's worth of blood. and not too little or too much is gotten from the patient, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the replenishment of the artery in him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if some cause of the spine remains on the bone, then incise this so that it does not develop into a painful apostema.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and ligatures of linen cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
When to some it happens that ancient emigration or sharp catarrh occurs, due to humid and grueling conditions in the temples, or old-fashioned violent symptoms similar to those, and is medicated with the methods of medicinal cure, but this does not conform, then we have resolved to extract the arteries in the temples, or cauterize them thus as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shows the arteries which are in the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most men except for a few due to the vehemence of the friction.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then gently rub the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with warm water until the artery becomes manifest to you. And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And then gently scrape the vertebra with that spatula with ease until you reach the artery; and then get into it and extract that part above all, and extract it from the vertebra and uncover those tunics which are below it, on all sides.
But if the artery is fine, then wrap it around with the extremity of the onyx, and then incise one part of that according to the quantity by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted, and do not allow a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
And then evacuate one vessel's worth of blood. into three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary for you to ligate that in two places with a double knot of thread or with cords as long, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and prevent blood flow.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligatures; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone and with a cauterizer in the shape of a knife, so that the extremities are incised, and remain in its place as an intermediate work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of scalded complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that helps to finish off the humidities, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And it is necessary to carefully extract the arteries that fill up the old cut, and let them be placed on the polyps decently made, and then let it be cured with dry medicines making the flesh appear and with some ointment until it is healed.
And if while you are working on another occasion there occurs a flow of blood from the artery, then immediately grasp to stop that blood, or with cauterization, or by filling up the old cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped. And if any of these causes is not present to you, then pause your hand on the location until the blood is congealed, and envelop the location with warm water of fervent heat so that the sharpness may rest, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And what is easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two blades, because you have marked the two locations with a tentacle, and then lay each one aside, entirely extinguished, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its extremities may be lengthened, for it is not completely consolidated by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
And the sharpness of the two blades is an example. But if it has less sharpness than two blades, then it is better, for if it is as sharp as two blades near each other, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, since in those there is some thickness, it is held that the heat of the fire is kept in them and the flesh is cut away slightly.
And this work is better than all other works and easier to accomplish.
And the space between the two blades should be equal to the thickness of the said digit.
Chapter IV.
On the Cure of Corrupted Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears from the Ears.
When there are acid tears, and the eyes of those veins which are above the forehead of the head protrude forth, and do not conform to any cause of medicinal cure, and the face of the patient is already inflamed and feels in its own forehead a wandering like that of ants, and the ears of that person are exhausted, moistened and worn out as if their skin was condensed, and the eyelids are scarred by the sharpness of the tears, those ancient agrumists mixed in the cure of these with this operation, and called it "spassa" curation.
And it is that you command the patient to tear off the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise three fissures equally distant along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little finger movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space between each incision is equal to three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge apparatus or dry cloths, moistened and saturated with which the blood is absorbed.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: which is from the side of the temples to the second incision. Scrape away with that all the cord which is between two incisions on the spine which is above the bone, and then make this move of the incision to migrate into the second incision. And then place this spatula aside and insert another instrument called "cutellar", sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the blade of that cutellar so as to cut through the flesh attached to the cord, and the blade of it cuts down into the bone, and push that forward until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the ears.
But continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make this move in the middle fissure into another fissure.
And since there is a quantity of blood that has coagulated, express the places of the pessaries where the blood has been collected.
And then pause in each fissure the old cut and pause over those polyps begotten in wine and oil and vinegar, and be careful that it does not develop into a painful apostema.
And on the third day release the ligature and administer great enthusiasm of warm water or tub, and then cure it with ointment made from basilikon oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
On the Cure of Lagrams by Catarrh and to the Ears, which descend from the parts behind the head.
When there occurs in some patient sharp and continuous catarrh, and the ears of that person are exhausted and small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin peeled away, and in the forehead of the head there is acute pain leading to exhaustion, then it is necessary to understand by these accidents that the matters and catarrh do not come from only a few veins but from many parts behind proceeding.
And the best cure for these is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and then incise a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little bit for the latitude (and start with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be the incision into the bone; and stretch your hand over the eyelids of the temples which are above the mastigatio), until the bone is uncovered.
Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill it between the two lips of the fissure with old cut or dry cloths. And then strengthen above on those polyps begotten in wine and oil, so that it does not develop into a painful apostema.
And when you have removed that and see that the apostema has decreased, then it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to produce flesh, and then cure it with an emollient regimen which makes the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from it make a poultice and administer it in these wounds for the nativity of flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the Cure of that which catarrhous in the Ears.
All causes that occur in the ears are one of four species, because either it is mineral or something similar to mineral, like iron and copper, or it is from plants, such as cheese or fava, or it is a fluid cause, like water and vinegar and their semblances, or some animal.
And therefore when mineral or some similar cause occurs in the ear that does not adjust or believe in the ear, and pauses the ear at the sun, and if the mineral is sometimes present, it is necessary to distill in that certain causes of oil of vitriol or sassafras, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stornudation in conditions, and open the nostrils before the event of stornutiation. And then pause in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many times it is forgotten about these causes.
And if not, then administer the extraction with the instrument called "gesti epicicarios" which is subtle and has this form:
And if it is forgotten about the "gesti", then so be it; and otherwise, then administer the extraction with the onyx of subtle duplication.
And therefore, if not forgotten about this, then make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the hole of the ear and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is free. And then extract with great force of attraction, because many times as we have recounted.
But if not forgotten in this manner, then take of holly lit or of prepared wax with which the birds are caught, and put that into the tip of the ray, and then wrap around it decently paused. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry out the ear from its humidity.
And therefore, if not forgotten about all the causes which we have recounted, then you should beware of cutting it before it develops into a painful apostema or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you first anoint the patient with the sap of the vena sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cease between your hands and convert the ear into the upper parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear above the grey hair. And the fissure should be of lunar shape until it reaches the peyra, and when the peyra is darkened, stop that if possible with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the cause occurs in the ear is one of the fat that creases and is inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if not obedient to your sight, then you take a spatula of fine iron according to this form: and administer with that the removal of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And don't do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many pieces, and then extract from those with onyx or with subtle instruments, or with incision as we have said, because it is facilitated the extraction of it.
But in the water which is entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutation in conditions at first, and fill his own ear with some old cut, and then pour oil over that ear where the water is, and if forgotten about this, so be it; otherwise, take many iron pears and lemons according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of his own ear and sits on top of it with another pear over the pear which is behind the ear. Therefore, do not cease this process until all the water has been forgotten.
Therefore, do not cease this process until all the water has been forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take of paper or of cotton, etc., and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end to the fire until the middle part of it is burned.
And then place another cotton and make it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and stretch that with a tube just as described above about the extracting pear.
But in the extraction of beasts that enter into that ear, if it is small-sized, just like a little one and similar to it, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is from great-sized, which appears on the side of the swelling, then administer the extraction with instruments and onyx, and the cause of it is more easily removed than all other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you cure it with that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not conform your treatment, then it is necessary to look at the ear to the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with instruments or subtle onyx; but if no cause appears, then take a tube made of stretched and widened material, the form of which is this: And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and then suck it out with strong suction, and make it many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if not obedient to your sight, then you open and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and find it in the treatise on distillations.
And this is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is this: And make that of silver or of lead, stretched, in which there is a small hole, and with a plate on top.
And thus it will be like as we have impelled that which is in the continuity of the tube, here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of it decently cut, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the tube -- and that is in the ear --, and then insert the ray with a cut above and compress it with your hand gently so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil outside.
And what is inserted into the ear is already scorched with fire a little bit. And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because the medicines of the ear cannot withstand this.
Chapter VII.
On the Cure of Ear Blockage.
Sometimes children are born with blocked ears from their mothers' unperforated vents, and this also happens to some men, blockage in the ear canal due to injury or flesh not perforated in that; and sometimes this blockage occurs in the prominence of the nose of the ear which does not consent to the swelling, and sometimes it is outside.
And that which occurs in the prominence of it, which does not understand the swelling, is in the greatest difficulties of difficult healing.
And in that where you can understand the swelling, it is necessary to pause the ear of the patient at the sun and look into it. And therefore, if there appears obvious swelling, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the end of it in which there is a small latitude, where one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula has two lion-like edges so that it does not cause damage to the ear.
And therefore, if the blockage is due to flesh born in the ear or in the canal of it, then take that with subtle onyx and cut that away with vehement facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is in the prominence of the ear, then take a subtle iron rod and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the canal of the ear.
And therefore, if you have felt obstruction with that which the patient has obtained with facility, due to gravity of air, force the oppression of it with facility; and beware that you do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
And then pause in the ear with cloth of lead according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have wrapped around it in Egyptian ointment; and make this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some powder and mix it with water and sprinkle it on top, and use it; and if the ear is already inflamed, then it is necessary to remove the powder and replace it with another powder which you wrapped around it in rose oil, so that the inflammation subsides; and then cure it until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then submerge the sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cure of Athazel Which Occurs to the Eyelids.
Athazels which occur on the eyelids of humans sometimes are humid, and at other times they are dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to take those with tentacles or onyx, and cut them with an instrument of their own roots, and then pause over the places as described.
But if pain accompanied by a flow of blood occurs, then you should cauterize those with a lunar cautery instrument.
And the best cauterization is to do it around the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
On the Cure of Grandeyss Which Occur on the Eyelids of Humans.
Many times it occurs on the eyelids of humans some cause which is assembled to grandess in its strength and hardness, and because of that grandess it is called.
And it is an accumulation of great moisture above and below the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider whether the grandess is proceeding from it in what appears to be the eyelid and is spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision in it with a fissure by latitude, and then carefully examine all parts with facility until it is evacuated; and then suspend it with onyx and remove it.
And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer harm from that because the ointment of it restores that and incarnates.
And if the grandess is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid you must remove the surface outwardly; then and there ease the eyelid and suspend the grandess with onyx, unless you are accustomed to incision, and press it all around; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, there is no cause noted.
And then wash your hands with salted water; and cure the place with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnah is a grayish growth which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and most often occurs in children, causing their eyes to become inflamed and leading to their cataracts being affected; and they are not able to gaze at the brightness of the sun because tears flow into them.
And therefore you should wet those eyes constantly on their faces, and they sleep on their faces; so that the eyelids of theirs below are covered with humidified swelling, which has already been inflamed, and there is apparent danger of cataract in the eye; and when you press the place with those fingers you said, you will bring about healing within them.
And some method of operation is in him who makes the patient put his head into a circle made from cloth and lead, and then puts on a mixture of lead and oil, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach of all parts; and then puts that on top and presses with those fingers you said of all parts so that it is aggregated arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then ends in the middle of that humid atmosphere with an instrument incised by a fissure for latitude, and the fissure should not be greater than the one made in flaubotomia.
But in the prominence it is necessary that you open the code entirely until you reach arcernach, for in the most suitable procedures arcernach is processed by fissure according to the form of white gersa.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the fingers of yours in the outer parts and revolve between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the instrument you may not reach the eye and it will be lost.
But if there is no arthernach in the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust slightly in the fissure with facility until arthernach processes; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of lead in water and vinegar, and make them wet and pause them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
And thus, some that are left over from that humidity pause in the cavity of the fissure for this reason.
And then cure that until it is healed.
But if there occurs an inflamed apostema in the place, then cure that with ointments which subside until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On Methods of Palpation of the Eye.
When in the eyelids of humans there are born natural folds and they become ancient, then those no longer belong to the eye and cause ways of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin until it is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called palpation of the eye, and cure itself in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made to be palpated by incision and suture; or by canals according to what I will say.
And therefore it is necessary that you put the patient's head in the said circle; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, good is; and otherwise, insert a needle into that part which is faithful to the outermost side of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate from above, and thus it will be  close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs  close to the hairs, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn that with the ray.
And then end in the outermost part of the eyelid below the hairs, adjusted with an instrument incised by the lacrimal major into the lacrimal duct; and then extract the thread and pause below the eyelid with small powders of coton or cloth, and then sign above the eyelid with a tent, and it should be as follows: like the figure of myrtle foliage.
But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified in men, for some of them require that a great quantity of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then end with the instrument on two lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is as wide as the natural folds of hair, like the thickness of a king.
And then put the onyx in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire area, and then adjust with the suture the two lips to the palate or thread of fine wool, and wash away the blood, and make adhere that which superfluously remains from the threads over two eyelids with some causes visible, if you wish to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
And then loosen the suture of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without suture, and cure that with that which dries up and constrains, for the eyelid is raised above the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of pus; but suture is better. And thus I say to those who are accustomed to taxanir.
But however, in this there is solicitude for the patient, and it is of good operation, and not from fear.
And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you sign on the eyelid a figure like myrtle foliage, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and gathered threads according to this form:
But if it is not possible to take the threads, and it is not equalized, then take one needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the lacrimal major, and the second thread near the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the fingers you said the threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with elevation equal to it, elevate the entire code over which is signed as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure that until it is healed.
But if there occurs an inflamed apostema due to your incision or your fissure, soothe that apostema with cerote and similar substances, and with gentle remedies.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted into hair, then it is necessary that you use in that what we have said about incision; but suture is more artificial.
Taxanir by canals is according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and then, by art, make two canals or two thin tubes of which the length is according to the length of the palpebra and the latitude of them is less than the latitude of the spatium. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety above that which superfluously remains of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each part with very strict constriction, and leave it for a few days, for the code will die and become denuded and will be absorbed into the skin within which it has fallen.
But if it is delayed, then break the thread and leave the torn parts, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and latitude neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On Elevation of Pricking Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, and rough, and prick the eyes, then the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and pause it in that thread of silk or linen, and then adjust the extremities of it and note each one in a manner very subtle. And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of one palm.
And then compose another fine thread below it in brief, and join the extremities of that if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in the said circle, and be near the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted to which it is necessary for engineering, and make that penetrate the eyelid promptly until you extract it above the natural hair.
And then pull out the hair above and insert that into alignment, and be the hairs one or two or three, but not more.
And then pull out your hand with that until the hair is outside and aligned in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if it is pulled out of alignment and the hair is not expelled, then pull out the alignment to the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is aligned with the above the surface.
And then gaze at that with the vision of the eye, for then you will pull out the alignment and the thread, and grind all and clean the eye, and leave the closure for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on top of it good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, then you adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is raised with that, or let it rest until it is lengthened to some space, and then you raise that.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cure for Pterygium which appears on the Eyelid above.
When pterygium appears on the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this pterygium either is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterization, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The method of the operation in this case is that you cut through the consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where there is a gap between them of cloth or linen, and tie those together until they are healed.
And it is not good that you use any cure for it from the causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to pterygium even worse than before at no time whatsoever.
Use in it causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and mix with the water in which are cooked almonds and sesame seeds of linen or aquilon ointment, which is liquefied with some oils, and immerse in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate all that is not consolidated according to the form in which it began.
And this operation which we have said is only some correction of pterygium that does not return to the form of the place according to what was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the Cure for Pterygium which is made in the Eyelid below.
This pterygium which is made in the eyelid below, which is truly called alxacrati; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or other such things.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a spatula wide. And then if the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is good, it is well; and otherwise, take a thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both incisions on the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of both incisions be at two angles of the incision which you have made until they converge, and be of their own making angle, so that when they come together it forms a figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then secure the flesh with that quantity which is the edge of the lower eyelid, so that it secures the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then cure those with what we have said of softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if pterygium develops through incision or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what has been previously said. And then separate with a poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of pterygium when it is above or below, that which runs in this operation, according to what is prepared from the form of pterygium, and that is in the form of various moles.
And the skilled artisans prepare with art in every manner that is possible to it, so as to return the figure to its natural form, or nearly so, and that sick person according to what is suitable for the operation and instruments in the greatest preparations.
Chapter XV.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
When this adhesion occurs to many men, it is solidified above the eyelid as a white album of the eye, and prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and raise it up or extend it with an instrument.
And then you incise the adhesion with a spatula subtle, which is not sharp like the cuts, having obtuse a small part so that the patient is not troubled by the operation, and leave the spatula that does not touch the eye with its subtlety.
And let your incision be what loosens that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash; or distill in it of unicorn's horn dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and place it on the eye lanolin infused in albumen of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the Incision of the Eyelid and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal.
Know that the eyelid is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, thin cipha; or it is non-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when touched by iron, or is forced to take an ointment, is abscised and the ointment does not stick in place.
And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, and then gradually cover the vision and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
But the method of working in this incision is that the patient puts their head in the said circle, and then opens the eyes of it, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the eyelid with an ointment of some duplication and extends that to the upper parts. And then take a needle and introduce into it a piece of horse or ox or cow hair, or similar, or strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie with thread the eyelid; and extend it to the upper parts, and cut away from the hair the edge of the eyelid which touches the pupil. And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal with a spatula subtle or small forceps, and free the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that by this incision there is not continuous flow of tears.
And some times the eyelid with extended or tied onic is thus as we have said, and then it should be excised with a lion spatula of which this is its form:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture in it, and that the pupil is pierced.
And then the incision is made in the eye with a small amount of finely ground salt or a piece of cypress wood dyed with senna, and let that remain until the next day; and then cure that with what is needed until it is healed.
And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is the ointment fixed in it, then many times this species of eyelid is cured with medicines, and is healed just as we have said and recounted in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you will operate on the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula with acute precision according to this form: ...with subtlety. And if at times it is rarefied and is congealed and presses into that root, then you must distill from your hand in the eye of cypress wood dyed with senna or with rose or with finely ground salt, and anoint the eye until the next day.
And then iterate over that the operation until all that is of it is remade, unless a contrary apostema is caught in the eye, for then you must leave it alone and cure the apostema at first until it is healed.
And then iterate your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye with great harm, should be suspended with an ointment; and incise that part, and do not leave off the incision lest continuous flow of tears ensue.
And then distill into the lacrimal eye with rose and senna, until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the Incision of Albuginea and the Water that is born from Adjusted Flesh in the Eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some there is born red flesh, and it is overlaid until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts above and is assembled like a rose lattice.
But the operation in this case is that the patient puts their head in the said circle; and then opens the eyes of that and collects all that red flesh with ointments suitable to it, and takes it away with a forceps or a basket; and then incises the flesh at first until all is finished by the instrument, and beware of the eye that you do not touch that which may spoil your operation.
And be your incision with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the eyelid, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to what will come of its form approaching this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that red flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely ground salt, or distill into it a red powder and similar to it the medicines corrosive, and place on top of the eye a covering of albumen of egg until you are assured that there will be no apostema.
And if there remains some cause of albuginea and it is severely inflamed, and you fear apostema, then leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with what is needed to remove that apostema, and then iterate over that with an operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
But first of all you must alienate all cure from the eye by natural or accidental means, act with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficient for that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Scales which come forth red and rough, which are thrust out on the eye and prohibit the sight its operation, and develop the eye in length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which scales are present is strong and there is no other disease besides scales, then you will collect those scales.
And it is that you command the patient to put their head in the said circle, and then suspend those veins with one ointment or two according to your prudence; and be that ointment of subtle duplication according to this form:
...or two ointments gradually in one mass according to this form:
And then be those veins collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and turned around.
And beware that you do not touch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is done in the midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you incise only those veins.
And when you have completed, then you must distill into the eye cypress green or red to such sharpness that it corrodes away the water that is removed from the scales.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all at that hour, then gather all the water that flows from the pain in that eye and leave it alone for some days until the pain subsides and there is no fear of apostema.
And then iterate over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the Reduction of Rhinitis to the Nose.
When you cure arisati with cauterization or acute medicine, and it is not preceded by the narrative of it and does not heal, then do not intervene in it except to open up a fissure on the apostema until it reaches maturity, and extract all the humidity that is in it and dry it out so that the bone is revealed.
And therefore when the bone is revealed and times in it corruption or blackness, then you must scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called the "aspre cap", and it is made of iron indistinctly, and it is a redon head like that which is made pointed by lime punctation or aliskalfatization by subtle point (like it is in the following form).
And then place that on the corrupted part of the bone, and gently revolve it between the said points, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
And then make it some times, and afterwards restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh is born in it, and the body of the pus is cut off and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed and not apostematized and there is no accident, then you will know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then do not intervene in it except to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take three threads according to this form:
Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it first attenuated to the end so that it is like many times.
And then place that on the bone, and be it close to the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the eye, and then revolve your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by means of which it is so when you take away your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines in such a way that it is as if they had been applied.
Therefore, when the flesh is gone and the place is hardened, then the material which was flowing to the parts above returns to the nose, therefore that is easier on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
When the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no harm or diminution in the operation, then you must loosen the patient, and then follow it, and then pause for breathing in the neck without scarification and sucking for good suction; and then pause on the eye a liniment which is made of atrament and aloe and gall and sarsaparilla, and then strengthen the plaster on the eye with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths from lions many times, and each cloth be folded into four pieces; and make powder of those.
And then pause those one upon another according to the quantity that the eye needs. And then strengthen on those with a durable cloth and a strong binding; and iterate the suction without scarification; and then stop the suction and leave the eye straight for a day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligature is relaxed, then it is necessary to make it very tight.
And then stop the ligature about day and night as we have said.
And if the eye is already reduced, that's good; and otherwise, then iterate the plaster with powders, binding, and suction until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the Incision of the Eminence of the Tunic Uvea.
When there is disruption in the tunic uvea, and it protrudes and proceeds outside of the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and its shape resembles that of a man by virtue of this, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, which is that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left above and the part below, and then place another needle in the double thread of the part of the lacrimal, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
And then extract the needle and pause on the eye with wool infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls away from the uvea.
And then cure the eye with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather all around with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted eminent grandness, and then be perforated by the subtle spatula that comes to the front of the eye, and flow out the albuginean humidity, and descend the eye and enter it soon.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the Cure of Alconati.
This disease which is called alconati is nothing but a pus that is situated in the eye, resembling descending water and not being that.
But the manner of acting on it is that you make the patient sit on a well-appointed and straight chair, and then take your own head in two parts and place that in such a way that you see the pus reaching the parts above, and then be dried and not descend, and stop the light, and the patient sees the causes as he would.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
But if the preparation for the descent of the pus is not done with the water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and find it on the panniculus cerning a little bit from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (into the place that you will see), until the pus is forgotten.
Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you must distill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then be cured by other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
We have already said the kinds of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing as we declare in sermon, then that according to health.
Then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and bind their own eye tightly.
And then pause on the side of the patient's eye with your left hand if their eye is the left one; or with your right hand if it is the right one.
And then with your right hand take alumina if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
And then pause the extremity of alumina close to the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and then impale alumina with virtue and revolve your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that alumina has already reached the seen cause.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of alumina to the front be equal to the measure of space which is the diameter of the pupil from the beginning of darkness to the end of blackness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil by the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And then pause alumina in the location where the water is, and then you attract it down once or twice, and thus if the water descends soon, then behold the patient with that on which their vision will soon be, and alumina in its own eye.
And then pause for a moment; thus if the water has descended, then you should place that other time ahead of alumina before it is dropped.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, you should extract alumina with ease, and revolve with it your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear gemstone salt and mix it with that to wash the eye outward; and then pause outside the eye with a cotton or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and albumen of egg white, and bind the eye tightly.
But we and those of our time pause over that which is torn apart with albumen of egg white.
And if it does not obey your alumina at the instrument of the eye by its hardness - for it is one of those men whose eye is very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called "alberid" and this is its form:
And then perforate with that the conjuncture, and do not stop your hand in the hole, and do not be if it is not that you make a way to alumina's subtle place.
And then introduce alumina according to what we have said.
And you must complete the complement of your work, be prepared for the patient's sleep descent made in which they will sleep on their back in a dark room, and be forbidden from all movements.
And pause in the nature of it so that its nature is linked, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
And be the bandage according to its disposition within three days.
And then remove that in the dark and expose the fresh vision, and make it see some causes, and then return the bandage within seven days.
And it is not necessary to do that at the time of the cure or soon after infusion. They had need that you avoid this because the water flows more lightly by great and vehement regard.
But if an apostema occurs cautiously, then you must remove the eye before the 7th day, and correct it with water that flows out of the apostema.
Then you will absolve the vision of it and pause on the face of it orally for which the moment is regulated by it for some days, existing in the darkest darkness.
And then be taken away from that great darkness and converted into its own causes.
And know that in alchemy there is no excuse for the disciple's vision a few times, and then you will be brave on the operation.
And it has already been reported to us by some of those who are in the Artach, and one said that fire is made in the Ayrac Magdalen, perforated at which the water is sucked.
But meanwhile you have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected water, nor do you read about it in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of Magdalen by which one may be above those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or of earth properly, and they are the extremities of their own with this subtlety triangular, the sharp end just like that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Cure of Flesh Rot in the Nose.
When in the nose are born various flesh rottings, some of which are caused by some cause resembling that of scorpio's weight or polyp's disease; and this illness is called polyps because it resembles that represented by pey. And in it are cancerous flesh, pale and of a dark color; and in it is that which is not flesh like a lion's color.
Then in that which is not flesh like a lion's color, and is not cancerous or fraudulent, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and anoint the nose with it, and prick once in those flesh. And then extract that from the outer parts, and then incise with that which you have comprehended from those with a sharp and subtle spatula, one part to the other, until you know that all the flesh is gone; for if there remains any cause by which it can be abscised, then you must ratify that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until no cause remains. But if the wound begins to bleed or an apostema occurs cautiously, then you must pause at that which is necessary; or it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the bleeding stops and all the cavities are gone.
And then be taken away from the nose with an incision, so that the water or wine may flow in. But if the nose is swollen and there is moisture proceeding into the palate, then you will know that it has already been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is flesh rot in the bones of the nose to which abscission has not been obtained.
Then it is necessary that you introduce the thread of lead to which there is some thickness, and thrust it into the bone with great force, and pause between each thrust the quantity of said or less, and engender the illness and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nose by means of a ray or another cause which is possible for it.
And when this has been done, then attract the thread of lead into the nose so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let it be situated on the upper part of the nose, because many times the children at school make a similar action, and it is a light cause for one who wants to do so.
And then pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a serration of flesh with the needles that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already sewn with the needles of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and pause in the nose near the abstraction of blood for a day or two, and do this for three days or more until the scabbed flesh is all gone from the bones.
And then pause in the nose with a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
But if you find that the cure does not exist, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument, the cupping vessel maker, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or earth, which resembles a small open lamp, like a small conch shell, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the cupping vessel maker be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you will hold that when it is soaked in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes suitable.
Chapter XXV.
On the Worms that are in the Extremities of the Nose.
Many times it is found that a worm is in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and multiplied in several days until one can see its regard.
And therefore you must incise that in the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that. And then pause over the place or cauterize or medicine which is in place of it.
But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is lapidated, hard, of dark color and of little sensation; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times the one who incises this apostema becomes greatly maligned by it against that which had it.
And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the place with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ear when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarity.
Know that when solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except in some men.
Then, when you have to deal with some cause of those, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and carefully cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then it is necessary that you excise each part of its own cord apparent until no blood flows. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on top of them sprinkle blood of dragon and well-stretched powder, and pause over the powder a piece of emplastrum diafinicon, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and let that be bound for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another plaster and let that remain until the flesh is abscinded, and then cure with scabbing until it is healed.
But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity with thread or needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with lead or other materials and make it known.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the Two Lips in the parts behind.
Many times it is found that some men in the parts behind their lips have certain apostemas hard and similar to grass errors, and some are smaller and others are greater.
Then, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fissures each of those hardnesses in all parts, and then fill the place with sagitta powder, well-stretched, until the blood is restrained, and then wash with wine and be careful to cure the place with what exists, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Incision of the Flesh Adjusted in the Gums.
Great many times nay over the gummed flesh which the ancients called albulus, then it is necessary that you suspend that with a needle or that you hold that with the forceps and incise that as it should be, and let the blood flow or run.
And then pause over the place with sagitta powder or other stiptic or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for then the cauterization will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the parts behind and in front, and between the gums are adjusted scorching aspersions, rough, black, and some times are made citrines or green, until it is seen that through this corruption the gums are decayed and the teeth are rough.
And then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head in your own seat, and remove the teeth in which those scorching aspersions and causes appear like sand, until there remains no cause of their own, and this will be done with the blackness and citrinity and other things until they are purified.
Then if this is at the beginning of the reasoning, good it is; and otherwise, then you iterate the reason over those for another day and for the second and for the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have needed many residues of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And therefore, because the razors with which the tooth is rasped from the part behind are another kind of razors with which it is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you which you will see soon:
Chapter XXX.
On the Eradication of Teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all ease and gentleness in total eradication of it, for there is no cause that can sustain the existence of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance into which it is excused in the eradication of it.
But it is necessary that when the patient is prepared to eradicate that tooth, you must be firmly certified which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and says it is in a healthy tooth, and then you eradicate that one and carefully note that the pain does not cease until the sick and aching tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of barbers.
Then, since you are certified which is the aching tooth, and what you know well, it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all part, and then carefully remove that with your own hands or with fine forceps little by little until it becomes loose.
And then, with great force hold tight the large instruments for good conversation or strong extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your own hands that you may not hurt them, and carefully remove the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And then, if not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it at a distance from the tooth on all sides with ease and effort, removing it as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is rough or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap a cloth around it and bind it with a thin thread at its extremity, so that it will not be torn in the hour of your constriction upon it when you take hold.
And it is necessary that you work with great care using a scraper in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that will be greater than the first pain.
And beware that you do not act like some ignorant barbers in their foolishness and audacity about the eradication of their own patients, for they do not administer what we have recounted; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are harder to be torn away, and all or some of those causes, or that extracts it with some bones of the jawbone just as many times we have witnessed.
And then, after the eradication, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
And if there is bleeding from it, just like many times there is, then carefully take some quantity of zeig and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that zeig does not help, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not doubled when you must work with them.
And should be like times of thick handle so that when you stretch with those they are not doubled, and short in length.
And should be made of Indian steel with handles made of straight extensions, and in the extensions of those some teeth are set which fit into each other and stretch by strong construction, and sometimes the extensions of those have the shape of a bird's beak, specifically that of a ciconia, so it is guarded, and they are of very strong construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of the Bones of the Jawbone Broken.
When you need to extract the tooth that is broken by some cause, it is necessary that you pause over the place cut with a border for one day or two until the place is mollified; and then carefully grasp with gentle hands or forceps the extensions of which are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Their extensions are made behind, just like a lime or an almond.
And if it does not obey to your gentle touch with these forceps or tweezers, then it is necessary that you cut through the bone and scrape off all the flesh and introduce the instrument called "atali", which is a small lever whose shape is this:
And it should be of short extension, thick and small, and not curved so that it will not break.
Therefore, if the bone is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extension in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extension.
And already having helped yourself with this instrument, you will find two ramps of which this is the form, approaching the following: and with other instruments which precede in the cutting of teeth; for immediately it is made with this instrument which is assembled like a great once, and this is the form:
of the triangular extension twisted or short, which has some thickness, and not curved so that it will not break.
And also know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to each other.
But the skilled and subtle craftsmen in this art find for themselves according to what the operation means to them, and the various diseases; for they are of those diseases to which the ancients did not say or pause proper instrument, by the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jawbone or of other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it is twisted, then carefully place a small weight on that spot where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures such as this:
And it should be in that place some small thickness, little by little, and it should be wrapped or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then carefully restore the spot with medicines suitable for this.
But if there is a small break in the bone, then carefully remove that from that break and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
When the teeth are elevated and not according to their natural form, and especially when they are in women, and even more so in venerable old ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and there is no possible suture or ligament of it, then carefully remove it; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you will incise it with this instrument whose form is as follows; and it resembles the jawbone of a pig, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp extension.
And be your incision in which you will incise that tooth for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confused with another tooth.
And if the elevated tooth is exposed to decay, then carefully file it with a file of Indian steel whose form is this:
And be it entirely of Indian steel and its margin finely sharpened; and be it with many small points just like a file in which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so that another tooth is not confused and clogged. And then carefully file it at the end, and remove it with some rasors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is broken and the tongue lies over it, then carefully file that tooth until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and equalized, and be filled in order that the tongue may not lie over it or corrupt the word.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
When accidents occur to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by chance, and the patient cannot withstand what is happening, and you have cured that tooth with stiptic medicines, and it has not been effective, then carefully prepare in those that are strong with a gold filling and not silver, for silver turns green and soon becomes weak after some days, but gold is never changed.
And be the filling in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the filling is that you take the filling and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and carefully increase it with two bends of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then carefully return to the original position, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged.
And be your grip such that you strengthen the filling so that it does not escape from the roots of the teeth.
And then carefully incise the superfluous edges of the filling with forceps or tweezers, and add them to each place with gestures, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then carefully let it set just like a stone.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that one or those with another filling in such a manner for all its time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just like these linked:
And when it is done that one tooth or two returns to its place, and are re-grown just like we have recounted, and remain.
And only a good craftsman and wise person can do this.
And sometimes it is suitable for some reason of cow bones, and it is made from them just like the shape of a tooth, and is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Incision of the Ligament which is in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
This ligament which is sometimes found behind the tongue or is natural to it and one has not noticed it before, or accidental and occurs by accident of a wound which has already been consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, and his existing tongue is in your sight; and lift up his tongue, and then carefully incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude, until the tongue is freed from its recent constriction.
But if in that ligament there is some hardness or knotting, and it has been set by the consolidation of the wound, then you will take a thread and carefully cut it through its latitude until you have divided the ligament and the knotting is dissolved.
And beware that there is not a false fissure in the prepuce of the flesh and that you cut here artery and bring forth flow of blood.
And then carefully wash the wound of the incision with water, vinegar, or fregged water; and then pause beside the tongue to relax it; thus is the way which keeps the patient's tongue relaxed in each night so that it will not consolidate again.
But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the place with vitriol powder; but if the blood flows, then carefully cauterize the place with caustic lanolin which is suitable for this. And then carefully cure it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Ranula behind the Tongue.
Sometimes, behind the tongue, an abscess forms similar to a small boil that prohibits the tongue from performing its natural function; and very soon it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth so that he is sitting in front of the sun and carefully observe the abscess.
And if you see it of a fiery red or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it is softened to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion into it, and carefully incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it off from all sides; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause above a powder scattered, that is vitriol, until the bleeding is stopped.
And then return to your work until you have completed it in accordance with the place, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that with another cure suitable for this, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the Extraction of an Abscess from Both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
When one endures in the Gullet a swelling, which are glands that are assembled together, which accidesc to the outside and are called two Ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of fiery red color, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; before leave that to mature, and then either you will extract it or break it apart by itself.
And if it is of a white color, rough, and the root of it is subtle, then that which is needed is to cut it.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already repaid its debt with complete rest or if it has decreased by some diminution; and then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head is in your sight, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of his tongue behind with an instrument of noble form:
And be made of silver or iron, and be subtle like a knife.
Then when you take hold of that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and you gaze upon it with your own sight, then take an onion and place it on top of that, and pull it out towards the outside parts as much as you can. Or another way is to take some cause of tunics, and then carefully incise that with an instrument whose form is this:
Or another way is to take some cause of tunics, and then carefully incise that with an instrument whose form is this: and it is assembled with forceps, however the edges of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of Indian steel well tempered.
But if this instrument is not to your hand, then carefully incise that with a spatula whose form is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have incised one notch, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then carefully give the patient a drink of water with vinegar.
But if there is a flow of blood, give the patient a drink of decoction of scorsone of myrtle or similar to that of other stiptic causes until the bleeding is stopped, and then carefully cure that one until it is healed.
And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said in the incision of two notches equally.
And I had already cured a woman of an abscess which was located in her gullet, which abscess tended to become fiery red, with little sensation, and had already closed off the gullet, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and had already forbidden herself from eating or drinking water, and had almost reached death if I had not acted for a day or two.
And the abscess had so swollen that it had formed two ridges and was about to burst through two holes.
Therefore I carefully cut open the fistula and remained in one of them, and pulled out that abscess, and it was drawn out with a great deal of discharge, and then I incised the other one from where it comprehended the other hole, and then I opened her mouth, and grasped her tongue, and then I placed the onion into that abscess.
And then I carefully cut out a great part of it, and there was only a little bleeding. Therefore the gullet of that woman was absolutely free, and she began to drink water soon after, and then I carefully prescribed food for her. And so I did not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period, and successive abscesses appeared in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Therefore I went and cauterized the gullet of her, therefore above addition; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done for me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Incision of an Umbilical Abscess when it is Apostemated.
When the umbilical cord is diseased in the navel, and it is apostemated and is long, then it is called a "perpendicular" one; and if it is on the side that is thick and rounded, then it is called a "bubble".
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with it, and it happens that the abscess has already gone away from there and is subtle, then you must incise that which is added on roundly; and if it reaches that length, and is sanguine, fiery red or black, and has no sensation in it, then you must fear the incision of it, because in that place there is fear for the patient.
And when you incise that according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, then you make the patient sit and take hold of his tongue with an instrument whose form is this: And carefully place the onion in the navel, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two notches.
And it is necessary that you do not incise that, but only as much as is adjusted to the natural term without addition, because if you incise too much, you will deprive him of his speech.
And then carefully incise it with that which we have mentioned in the incision of two notches, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you must use great care in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cauterization is nothing but with sharp water, and that you pause the head of the patient in your sight, and carefully grasp his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confine it to that living cause, and pause that no thick or subtle, and fill that concavity with the instrument whose form is this:
And let the edge of it be in the concavity in which the medicine is paused, just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the navel, and the patient will stretch out his hand over his own side so that he may pour saliva or mouthwash from his mouth into that concavity through the intrinsic medicine, so that none of those causes will descend onto the gullet of him and trouble it.
And then carefully take your hand and the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until you see it to be discolored and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a syringe or needle, and make sure that the cloth adheres to the syringe or needle, and do this as many times as you need until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it be so that it dries out and falls off about three days or four.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, iterate it, and then carefully cauterize it in the circuit of the uvula with cloth wrapped around it, and clean off any residue from the circuit of the medicine, and wash it thoroughly with vinegar water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with gargling, until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is even more saved than incision and less long in fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something even more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, myrrh, origanum, ruda, Arabic scicados, camomile, broth, and similar herbs to those of plants, and mix all those causes, or some of them, into a bath, and let them be submerged in vinegar water, and boil; and the bath should be well stirred with a decent stirring, and there should be a hole in the middle of the bath, on which should be placed an instrument made of iron or steel according to this manner.
And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the uvula on the quinsy, until the uvula is quite obscured.
And then repeat this process many times until it is dry, and be careful not to apply this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would be too intense for the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather declare the appearance of the abscess first.
But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and compose in the extremity of it a bundle of cotton, so that the mouth of the patient may be closed, because the closure of the cotton prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the Extraction of Thorns and of what adheres in the Gullet and of other Causes.
Many times something adheres in the gullet or thorn from a fish or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is apparent from those things that are seen above the gullet, because you grasp the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden to you in the gullet, then you must make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because the attached cause to the gullet will be forgotten by vomiting; or that the patient drinks a potion of nape or of razit of laytuga or a bowl of dry bread; or takes a piece of marine sponge, and binds it tightly with a thread, and then makes the patient swallow it, so that when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten. And then take a snake and bind it tightly with a thread, and place it inside the patient's mouth and then pull it out; or take a fork and place it inside the patient's mouth and then pull it out.
But if those causes are not forgotten as we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And be more thick than a reed, a little one, and in the extremity of it be a concavity which you insert into the patient's gullet with ease.
And it will make the patient's head rise upwards, and be careful that the touch of its bone in the throat is gentle, so that it does not disturb the flesh or the spine, or put pressure on the bone or the thorn.
But meanwhile, the patient will move that part of his body into a sweet position, by virtue of his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and its descent below, and pull his hand with the instrument towards him, all according to the quantity which is prepared in advance until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Extraction of Blood from the Gullet.
When blood is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure with medicines and does not agree, then consider that in the gullet of the patient to the sun, because you have grasped his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see blood, extract it with a small onion or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave syringe and insert it into the patient's gullet, and carefully pause in the concavity of the syringe an iron hot instrument, and do this many times (until the blood is dead and comes out of the gullet) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
And then take a vial full of vinegar water, and work the patient's mouth with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause emerge from that and spoil the water for an hour afterwards by putting it in the patient's hand, because the blood will soon come out when it feels the water.
But if it is not forgotten as we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with camphor or with assafetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
This is how it will be, and then it will fall out.
And there is another manner of operation in the subfumigation of that, which is: you take a bath in which are hot coals and the bath is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole; and the extremity of the instrument is composed in that hole; and then carefully wait above the subfumigation; and have the patient's mouth open at the extremity of the syringe, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will soon fall out.
And if it does not fall out, then you must iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water to drink, and give them salty causes and salted foods, and not give them vinegar water, and so it is necessary that with this regimen it will be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the gullet when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps like those, but with some curvature. The one that is placed in the gullet, and its extremity is like a stork's beak, which is grasped, in which a lime is sharpened, so that when it compresses any cause, that one does not loosen.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against abscesses and their section.
Abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
And thus diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and therefore that they comprehend the humors.
And the second manner is according to the places in which they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs on the head is another from one that occurs on the tailbone; and an abscess in a fatty location is another from one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
And besides, some abscesses are such that they must not be pierced, but rather allowed to mature and heal on their own.
And some abscesses are such that they must be pierced when they are crossed, and not allowed to mature according to their natural course, just like those abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess that occurs near a joint is prolonged into the circuit of the joint, and then it is corrupted by affecting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near the main limb, and if you delay the puncture until the abscess has matured on the main limb, or it is an abscess near the anus, so pierce it when not yet mature; and do not pierce a green abscess, without proper digestion, but only that which is near the anus, in order to avoid prolonging the passage of stool and causing a fistula, or that it becomes a condition that cannot be cured. But you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and thus is when it has matured.
And you must know that it is mature when there is cessation of pain and fever, and accordingly the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the tip of the abscess, and other signs.
And thus it is necessary to know that the puncture should be made in the most dependent part of the abscess and closest to the cure of the prominence.
And puncture should be made through the length of flesh or muscle if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in areas of the loins, cords of nerves, or tendons; and finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
And when the abscess is in a fatty location, then it is better that you wait until the perforation of it is confirmed by the digestion of it according to its natural course, as we have said; because if you puncture it too soon, it will prolong the process of the body's discharge and much pus, and therefore the lips of the abscess will be hardened and its depth increased.
But some abscesses are punctured according to the necessity of the location of the flesh or muscle, or according to what the affected member demands.
And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And some abscesses are such that the cord needs to be concaved and incised, when it is done in a way that is already stated, like those that occur in troops of boils and buboes.
And some abscesses are such that they are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one which is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as with those abscesses of the gout sufferers.
And some abscesses are such that they receive a circular section and a lunar section, and resemble those.
But as for the one that is not like those abscesses of lions, which are superficial and do not have a deep or complex shape, it is necessary to pierce it with a superficial puncture or only a flat one.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part, and then stop the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and so on many times according to gradation until it is forgotten.
And especially if the patient is a young child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit many times is resolved through the egression of pus, and then the patient will die, and you should intervene.
Therefore, keep this chapter with great caution, and carefully perform the puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, so that you cleanse the plagues and consider whether the plague of the abscess is small, or is a flat section; then administer those of like or similar things; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary to pause in each track until they are together.
And if in the abscess one part of the cord has been severed or has been concaved in the circuit, then it is necessary to complete it with old cloth or a thread made from linen fabric, just as when you are binding pans or razors, its moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and accordingly process it and cure the patient with the same method until they are healed.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer vinegar water and wine mixed with linen cloth, and pause that over the location of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen and cure, and dust those which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary to wrap powders in vinegar and oil, warm them, and pause them over those locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary to pause powders wrapped in water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all should be cool within three days, just as we have said, and then you must loosen the abscess and cleanse it, and administer the cure according to what is suitable for it until it is healed.
And thus this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have said about each abscess in which manner is the way of its cure by chapters separately.
Chapter XLI.
On the Section of Abscesses that occur in the Cord of the Head.
In the cord of the head small abscesses occur, and there are species of nodes that contain tunics which are according to their facts; and the species of them are many.
And among them are pustules, and those that contain moisture similar to lime. And among them are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling their own kind; and those that are lithoid, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should not make the extraction cause contraction of the artery.
And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is similar to this, which is called an entrume, until you know what it contains.
Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then cut it with a section according to its length, in a superficial section following this form:
And begin in the section of the line .B. up to the line .G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, cut off that portion which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for many times it returns, if some cause remains.
And accordingly, submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it for another day, for by this, you will corrode all that remains of that skin.
And accordingly, iterate over that cloth with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if it is needed of it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then cut into it according to this form: with a section having the form of a cross, and cut into it between two lips of the section and scrape off all that part, and strain your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
But if your artery becomes contracted, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do with the lithoid abscess of section and cure according to what we have said; and the section over the lithoid abscess is more gentle, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are cases of these abscesses which are in the head of some men who do not have moisture; and this cause is because you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and break open the abscess like a deaf, harsh, white palsy that could not be shaken off, and if any force was applied to it, it would become infected.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, it is not this chapter, such as those that occur on the heads of children and in the crevices of the ears, but the section of all these shall be superficial.
And pause the puncture at the lower part of them, so that it may be alleviated the body from the pus to the lowest parts.
And accordingly, cure those with what is suitable for its cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the Section of Scrofulas which occur in the Neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and shoulders; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many which are generated between them, and all the scrofula of those is surrounded by its own tunic, just as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, just as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lithoid, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not yield to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Tocament, whose manifest color is akin to the color of the cord, and is spread out over all parts, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and does not swell, then you should incise it with a superficial section from above to below the body along the line of .G. up to the line of .B., and scrape off that part completely, and extend two lips of the cord with one or many oncements if necessary, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And be more cautious so that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And be careful not to cut too deep, lest you adjust your hand to your own mark or wound the patient, or else you would inscribe something that is not necessary to inscribe; for if you cut into a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound, whether it is a bruise or other powder that stops bleeding, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess has subsided and the wound has become softened and begins to heal. When the blood is severed.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And accordingly, inquire about the sign given by your teacher if there is any remaining cause of other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula, then it is necessary that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots. Therefore, bind it with a double thread and leave it until it falls off on its own without causing harm.
And accordingly, fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and accordingly cure that.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close them as soon as possible so that there remains no superfluous excess.
But if you find that there remains excess due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it, and administer suture and what is said.
And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture at the location where you find the point of maturation of it, and pause puncture at the lowest part of the body, just as we have said.
And accordingly, administer puncture with ointment and similar substances to those, in order that it may corrode what remains of the corruption. And accordingly, when you find that the wound is already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generated flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the Section of Pilling off the Abscess which occurs in the Groin.
The ancients have described this section in the pillography, and I have not seen any man in our land who has practiced it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men with hemorrhoids, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the pillography, because through this, there would be no advantage for the patient, since all the veins and main vessels are here.
But in those who have abscesses located in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the cane, it is necessary to use the section of pillography to flee from the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the pillography behind three circles of the pillography, or four with a small section along the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section be in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood are nearby.
And if the doctor is fearful, then it is necessary that he extends the cord of the groin with one incision, and accordingly cuts the cord into the channel, but avoids the vessels of blood if he sees any cause.
And accordingly, incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified about the section of the channel by the flame which is from that place and comes forth with water which is broken down and by the absorption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, as the hour is re-matured in which puncture is feared, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and close it alone except for the cartilage.
And accordingly, administer medicines that make the flesh to heal, until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of this sermon which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these abscesses have opened up the groin of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the pulse of life is interrupted, and some are about to incise the epigastrium so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And therefore, I command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; and therefore, I command that way the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a cote and placed it in his groin and incised a part of the canal of the lung, and you were called to its cure, and opened up the mouth as if it was crying out like one who is dying, and discovered the wound and opened up the blood which was flowing from the small part of the wound.
Therefore, you were confessed that it had not cut into a vein nor a nerve, and the wind was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
And there was no harm to the servant except that he grew hoarse in his voice, and accordingly some days returned to better disposition.
And now I say to you that in the section of pillography, there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Section of Abscess which occurs in the Groin outside and is called Hernia of the Groin.
This abscess is named Hernia of the Groin and is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, there is no way to cure it.
And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to abscesses that are caused by the constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And it is not necessary to make assumptions about it unless it is small. And you should proceed with that and investigate it according to the dictum, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it as one would incise nodes, and extract it with what contains the skin and bursa; and otherwise, you should scrutinize all its being, and accordingly cure the location where it needs to be cured until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the Section of the Species of Nodes.
Of the nodes, many species and you have already said all their species in the division.
And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence, so as to dispel doubt.
Therefore, you say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is calmed; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that ciphac lion which is in its own sack.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and is made thus as a vessel, whether major or minor, and they are two species, either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, according to what you said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you expose it and inquire into its beginning with a instrument which is called an intrumentum, according to what will come forth in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And it is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all nodes, that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid location which you find in the abscess, and you turn the points of the instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the cord.
And accordingly, your hand should be last according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and accordingly extract the intrumentum and consider what is situated in its vestige.
And if the moisture current is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
And if from the vestige of the intrumentum there is no moisture, then you should know that it is fat.
And dry it over with a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus as I have taught you, and suspend it with one incision, and excise the cord from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sack, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it happens so, and accordingly you should extract it piecemeal until there is no longer any cause from it.
For if from it remains no cause, a little or too much, the node will return to its former state.
And if you find that from it remains some small part, then complete the wound with certain corrosive powders acute and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which is seated apostema cautiously, and cure that from other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a great node, then you should close the two lips of it and cure it with that which nourishes.
But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it, or non-pulsating, then you should compress and apply pressure to the location of threefold stitches that are vertigo-like, and let that rest for two or three days until the wound is quieted and the ebullition of blood ceases; and accordingly return to incising what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Forms of Instruments necessary in Section and Perforation.
Of those, the forms of intruments are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium, and some small.
The form of great intrument is this:
The form of small intrument is this:
They are made of iron, of alfulud, and of curved extremities descending, in order that the instrument may be inserted into abscesses.
And these are the forms of instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
And there are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium, and some small.
The form of great instrument, the shape of it:
The form of medium instrument, the shape of it:
The form of small instrument, the shape of it:
Conveniently, these are for those abscesses and excrescences and fistulas and boils, because among them there are of bones and of other causes.
And thus they are made of redontz, grosses, leons, just like great needles with which the seams are sewn, and they are made of terra citri, or of earth or iron or silver, And the best ones are when they are made of terra citri.
And they are made of black plume instruments, which are adapted to those in which the fistulas are located in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected in their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three species, that is to say, some of them are long, and some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Form of the great instrument of lead:
Form of the medium instrument of lead:
Form of the small instrument of lead:
The forms of the needles are many species, that is to say, some are simple, which have only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium.
And among them are orphic needles, and there are three species.
And among them are needles with two curvatures, and there are three species.
And among them are needles with three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small needle, the shape of it:
Form of a great needle having two curvatures: Form of a medium needle having two curvatures: Form of a small needle having two curvatures:
Form of a great needle having three curvatures:
Form of a medium needle having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are sectioned and excised, and there are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium, and some small.
Form of a great scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that there is no fear of cutting into a vein or nerve, and by them the patient is cured and obtains tranquility for a little while due to the adjustment found necessary for the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium, and small, just like veins.
They are made of terra and resemble rays with which alcohol is made.
And it has on the pointed end a hidden point and in that it goes through the parted parts within and without, as you see.
The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the said points for the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventozas with which the flow of blood is arrested, and there are three species: great, medium, and small; the forms of it:
They are made of terra citri, rounded in some length, and are subtle.
And it is necessary that you have these species of ventozas, great, medium, and small, in order that through them the flow of blood may be arrested with speed when needed, and therefore, when your first remedy is not medicine.
However, you should not use them to arrest blood in all parts of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy locations, just like in the skin folds of the thighs and groins, and in the armpits and nipples and belly and groin areas, and similar to those of fleshy human skin.
And sometimes they are made of those small instruments resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is arrested when it is cut through phlebotomy, or due to incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made rounded according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the Cure of Men's Breasts which are assembled like Women's.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen as they begin to sleep, and accordingly they become swollen, and the breasts like those of women, apostematosed, distant.
And to that one who has this condition, it is necessary to incise those parts with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and accordingly excise all the swelling, and accordingly fill the wound with an incarnate medicine, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the breast declines to its parts and is softened by its magnitude, just like in women, then it should be cut into two equal parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one should be contained within the other until the end of each one, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from the line of .B. to the line of .G. And accordingly excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer that which we have said about suturing and powders which are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which should be cut because of the unease of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submergent potion in corrosive oil and leave that one until the corroded part that remains of the grayness, and accordingly cure that one until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Perforation of Abscesses that come forth with Lichenification.
Those abscesses that come forth with lichenification are of the species of scrofulae, hard ones, which contain a bag of skin.
And some of those contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, then you should fill it with good oil and leave it until the next day.
And accordingly, the oil should be stopped and the wound should be cured with a suitable poultice for that, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrofulae, then you should cut over it just as we have said in the section on scrofulae similarly.
And if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes a poultice, then you should administer to it a cautery according to what we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Section of Abscesses that occur through Artery or Vein.
When an artery is broken and the cord which is above it becomes consolidated, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: for when an abscess is caused by an artery, it is long aggregated in the precordium of the body; and when you impelate the abscess with those said ties, you will feel a stridor in it.
And that which is caused by a vein is rounded to the manifest of the chest.
And the section on this abscess is an error, and most especially in those that are situated near the armpits, groins, neck, and many other places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is located in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
But on that which is due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should cut in the cord section in length; and accordingly, you should make the section with scissors and accordingly apply it to the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
And accordingly, you should sew that thread and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places,  which cause is to your eyesight in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
And accordingly, you should push the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until the blood that is in it flows out and the abscess is dissolved.
And accordingly, you should administer a cure in which fire is generated until the ligaments fall away; and accordingly, you should cure that one with suitable poultices for it until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to section of a vein, then you should hold the place with your hand on the abscess and the cord, and accordingly introduce the needle below the location which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that file double so that you can extract that one from the other side, and accordingly tie the abscess with a double ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligature of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then accordingly introduce a thread with that needle below all the abscess so that the incision of the first needle is made, and tighten the four threads in those places.
And accordingly, cut the abscess in the middle of it so that when what is in it is evacuated, you should incise the superfluity of the cord, and leave what remains tied.
And accordingly, apply to it the poultice which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and accordingly administer the cure made with some and powders until it is healed.
Chapter L of the Abscess that occurs due to Torsion of Nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, so too does an abscess occur in the nerves when it occurs through percussion or excessive travail, and similarly.
And it is made the most in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where the joints are bad.
And it is a great abscess, and is akin to the color of another body, and is in the greater part of it disposed to its place, when it is stretched with great vehemence, and then in it the patient seems stupid.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the precordium of the body, and therefore it remains outside, and it is bad on all sides and does not go to any parts before or behind.
Therefore, the one that is in the joints should not be sewn with iron, for very lightly it would bring about contraction.
But the one that is on the head or forehead should have the cord cut with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then you should take it away with forceps and cut it from the roots.
And if it is great, then you should suspend it with scissors, and excise that, and accordingly stop that; and adjust the wound with sutures, and cure that one until it is healed.
Chapter LI.
On the Section of Abscess which occurs in the Abdomen.
I have observed in some men many times that certain parts of their bellies and other parts of their bodies are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is thick; and the lips of these are conversed, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnificent.
And I have also seen one, and in the belly of it were two thorns which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones with fine roots.
And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Therefore, you should incise them and cut into one in pieces that weigh 18 ounces. and the other weighs 6 ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider at the time if the patient is humid, and the color of the thorn is white, humid, with fine roots; then you should cut into it with a spatula late, and have cauterizers in the presence of fire, because many times the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if you see the blood flowing, cauterize that.
And if the patient is weak and trembling, be careful not to cut with iron; but rather take a lead thread freshly made, and tighten it on that thorn, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And accordingly adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the lead thread greatly on that thorn, until it is cut off and falls away by its own travail.
But if the thorn is of great root, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and dread, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But possible is that you cut off most of it, and accordingly cauterize that so that it does not return.
And accordingly, cure that one until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut that thorn which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and little regard, for it is absolutely cancerous.
And you will find memory of a cancerous abscess accordingly.
Chapter LII.
On the Cure of an UMBILICAL HERNIA.
An umbilical hernia is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is above the belly, and eyes of it bursting forth as if it were a bag or pouch according to what has been said in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by ventosity constricted in there.
But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and bursting forth of the bag, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and accordingly appears in different situations. And if it is due to the bursting forth of the bag, then the situation of that with respect to water which we have recounted, and more vehement diversity, and as you press that with the threads said, it is concealed, and accordingly returns; and very soon it will be in its place, and is magnified much with regard to the introgression of blood and vehement travail.
But if it is due to humidity, then the situation of that one is like an onion and not concealed when you press with your hand, nor constrained, nor crept.
And if it is due to blood, then accordingly, the abscess appears with these signs declining towards blackness.
But if it is due to nothing but flesh, then accordingly, the abscess is a great one, large and hard, and is situated according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to ventosity, then accordingly, the touch of it is like an onion.
And the operation in that case is to consider at the time if the umbilical hernia is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or ventosity; accordingly, you should be prohibited from curing it, for in that case there is fear and dread just as I have taught you in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the umbilical hernia is due to the bag or the pouch, then accordingly, you should command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and accordingly, make a sign with your tent in the circuit of all the umbilic, and accordingly, command him to stand between your arms on his right side, and accordingly, circle around with a spatula wide in the circuit of the umbilic over the place which you have marked with your tent; and accordingly, extend most of the abscess upwards with scissors large; and accordingly, tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or cord and the manner of tying decent.
And accordingly, cut the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce the said thread into it and seek out the bag; and if you have not found nor guarded by the ligament, then accordingly, you should extract the remaining portion and push the bag towards the parts inside the belly.
And if you have reached the pouch, then accordingly, take it with scissors; and cut out the superfluities of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly, circle around that much, and accordingly return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and introduce two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and accordingly, tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the place until the flesh extended falls away by itself; or cut it when it is softened and falls apart, and accordingly cure that one with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the umbilical hernia is caused by flesh nothing in that place or due to humidity, then accordingly, you should conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find in it, and accordingly cure that one with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Chapter LIII.
On the Cure of Cancer.
We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it should be treated with medicines, and that it is a warning to avoid curing it with iron because it would not be ulcerated; and we have also said that cancer is generated in the majority and caution of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as in the breast or armpit and its likenesses of limbs allocated to extract all of it, and especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and great, you should not take ownership of it, for I have not seen anyone cure it completely or partially, nor has it been passed down to this day.
And the operation in that case is when it is allocated as we have said, which is to precede and leave the patient and purge them with black cholera several times, and accordingly sign it, if there is a clear manifestation of repletion.
And accordingly, prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for the operation, and accordingly prohibit in the tract of scissors those that are needed for it; and accordingly, concave all parts with a good cord for thorough excision so that no cause remains for the roots of it. And accordingly, let the blood flow and do not cut it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the gross blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
But if there is a contrariety of gross blood incision in the vein or artery, then accordingly cauterize that one until the flow of blood ceases, and accordingly cure that one with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LIV.
On the Cure of Hydroceles.
We have already recounted, in the division, about the species of hydroceles of water and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
And that one which is cured with iron is not but the species of hydroceles alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanic sac or to the species of hydropsy, for this is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydroceles tympanic sac with medicines and your treatment has not been confirmed, then accordingly consider, for if the patient is already debilitated, or has another malady, such as in the lungs or belly and similar to those, then accordingly be careful not to treat it with iron, for fear is over that.
But if you treat the patient with abundant virtue, and in it there is no other malady except hydroceles alone, and not infant or old, then accordingly the manner of the operation for it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and minister to him accordingly, expressing the belly of him with his own hand, filling the water at the exit of the pentenilh, and accordingly take a spatula with spines in this form:
to be of two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity like a spatula; but however, there should be in it some smallness little by little, so that in the operation on it, one does not penetrate into the bag and leaves it.
And accordingly consider if the generation of hydroceles is from one of the bags, for then you should take with the section to be away from the navel by three times as much as the parts left behind, on the right side of it above the pentenilh.
But if the generation of hydroceles is due to liver disease, then accordingly your section should be on the left side of the navel by three times.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then accordingly your section should be in the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie down, so that the superfluities do not flow into that place freely.
And accordingly perforate the entire cord with an instrument and enter into that section, lift your hand with a spatula between the cord and the sac, and excise it; and if the quantity of one fingernail or thereabouts.
And accordingly pierce the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the place where you want it to be, and it is the location of the water. And accordingly extract that one and enter with an instrument whose shape is this: and it is similar to a silver canula; it is made of silver or copper or bronze, at which the bottom part has a small hole, and on both sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is cut according to the manner of a feather, as follows:
And in the uppermost part of it is an eyelet, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that one immediately falls on top of the instrument, and thus evacuates a moderate quantity of water, for if you evacuate more than what is needed at this time, soon the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or else you will cause harm to them which is approaching death.
But evacuate as much as the virtue of it and according to what your dispositions indicate for the patient's vitality, pulse, and goodness.
And accordingly extract the instrument, and retain the water which is retained because it is held back by the cord which retains the hole that is above the cicatrix of which we have said to you that you should pierce it in this manner.
And accordingly iterate the instrument to another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and make this go on for some days with caution, and be careful not to err until there is very little water left.
But if you fear for the patient, and leave a great quantity of water, then accordingly cure it with burial in hot sand, and moisten with warm bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and cure it with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and liver accordingly with the extraction of water, according to what we have recounted earlier.
Chapter LV.
On the Cure of Children Who are Born with Undescended Testicles Not Perforated.
Some times some of the children are born like that, from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture not perforated (or it is a narrow hole or not in its place).
Then accordingly, make a small incision on the child as soon as it is born with a spatula made of subtle bronze in this form:
And accordingly, pause in the hole a small clip made of subtle lead and tie it, and let it be for three days or for four times.
And when it is time to urinate, it should be renewed and reformed; and accordingly, return that one.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to close.
But that one of which the hole is narrow should be treated with a lead clip, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place are led astray, which is because from them, that which is born and thrusts forth is due to the end of the head of the foreskin so that it cannot urinate into the parts behind, until it lifts the foreskin with its own hand to the parts above; and this is not a generation, for which reason the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a miserable disease.
And the manner of the operation in this case is that the patient be laid on his back, and accordingly extend the head of the foreskin with your left hand with a violent extraction, and incise the head of the foreskin at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as a feather is cut or if you cut out some part, so that the middle of it becomes like the head of the foreskin and the hole falls in the middle place according to what is needed.
And be careful that in your operation of blood flow, for many times this happens; and pause at the place where you cut the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the Foreskin which Accidents in the Prepucii of the Head of the Foreskin, and on Corruption, Blackness, and Adhesion of the Prepucii to the Head of the Foreskin.
Many times this foreskin becomes inflamed in the head of the foreskin and is an excessive prominence of flesh.
And one of these is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend with a subtle thread and cut it so that all of it becomes free from the foreskin; and accordingly pause over it for three days in an Egyptian ointment; and accordingly cure it with another ointment, day by day, until it is healed.
And if the foreskin is malignant, with a foul color, then accordingly you must administer caustics around the incision and the surrounding area.
But if the foreskin is in the prepucii of the head of the foreskin not-circumcised, and one part of the foreskin is inside the prepucii and the other part is outside, then accordingly you must remove the foreskin that is inside at first until it is consolidated; and afterwards you cure the one that is outside, for when you cure both together with the prepucii, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And already many accidents occur in the genitals and prepucii, namely blackness and corruption; therefore it is necessary to conquer all this which is already denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or has corrupted; and accordingly line on top of that with a mixture made from honey, which is mixed with flour of scoria of millet and of errors trampled and crushed.
And accordingly cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding, then accordingly administer lunar caustics in this form:
for the caustic juice is good at two dispositions together, that is to say in bleeding and in a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the foreskin is destroyed and all in an instant, then accordingly it is necessary to introduce a lead tube into the meatus of the prepucii so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the prepucii to the head of the foreskin (and this adhesion only occurs in one who has an uncircumcised prepucii, and on whom no circumcizion has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) it is necessary to excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those excrescences exactly, then accordingly it is necessary to excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the foreskin and the prepucii, and thus it is because when the prepucii is subtle, it is easily perforated by its subtlety lightly.
And accordingly separate between the prepucii and the head of the foreskin with a thread of subtle lead, which has been moistened in water so that they will not adhere again.
And accordingly it should be cured with a vinegar-strengthened remedy until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the Circumcision of Children and the Cure of What Occurs to Them in Circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but since it is our operation and our will, and the purpose of which is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it a better operation and way that is more gentle and less hurtful to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have discovered through experience, which reason is that you have found that most of the artists and barbers use circumcising and cleansing with a new razor and with toreros; and they tie with a thread and inscribe with a nail.
And I have already forbidden all these methods and did not find better cleansing with razors, threads that tie with a thread like the nail in cleansing, because many times the cord above has fled, because the cord of the prepucii has two tunics, and the tonic is left behind, and soon it will be forced to another incision and certain pain. And the cleansing method that is made by aliphatic acid, and is digested, which is used by barbers, is not assured of the incision at the end of the virile member, because soon it will enter into the wound.
But in the operation with a nail, soon iron will be oxidized and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is such that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
But the cleansing that is done with razors and threads with a thread, the goodness of it has been discovered by me through experience, because the razors are of proportional incision, for which reason the acuity above is as the acuity below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally two acuities, and inscribe accordingly in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the first manner of the operation is that you should make the child stay in a state of quietude, whether it is one of those who understand a little or not, and that you should only lay the thread on the foreskin so long as necessary, and then leave it alone until the next day.
And accordingly make the child happy in all that manner which is possible to you, according to what it receives its intelligence. And accordingly make the child sit between your arms, well prepared and not at all frightened; and hide the razors in your hand or in your lap, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
And accordingly place your hand on the foreskin of him and blow into the cord, and pull it until the head of the foreskin is out, and accordingly cleanse that which has accumulated in the area of the foreskin.
The form of the razors for cleansing, this is the form:
Be the outer edges not cutting and the inner ones cutting, so that there is no space left for the hinge of the lock, and be the length of both acuities as the length of two equal hands.
But the error in cleansing is that soon the inner cord will be entirely or partially cut off from its inscription.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend that of your hour with your finger before the apostema of the place and that you inscribe it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then accordingly extract it with a thread and inscribe it.
But if three days have passed and the foreskin has become inflamed again, then accordingly you should let it be for a little while until the inflammation is subsided cautiously, and then excise it with facility, and inscribe it according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the foreskin, for it will not be at all in that place.
And therefore cure that with the water which has consolidated from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inscribed by the cord with measure, and submits to the parts above, then this will not be noticed at all.
And therefore cure that with the water which we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made through fear or blood congested, or through pouring or fleshiness, and it resembles those cases which we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause is vehement and made upon the patient, accordingly it is necessary to administer extraction of it by instrument which is called syringe, the form of which is as follows: It should be made of silver and a subtle lead combined, like a canula of an eagle's quill with subtlety of ray long in similitude of half a palm, with a thin cane in its head.
And the manner of extracting urine with that is as follows: You take the doubled thread and tie it in the extremity of the lanolin or cotton for good binding; and then you insert the ends of the thread into the posterior part of the syringe, and inscribe with razors if any superfluous cause of the lanolin exists, but instead introduce it into the canula with vehemence And accordingly you should pour the ciringua into the border and album of egg.
And make the patient sit on the seat, and wrap the bladder of him and the foreskin with olive oil and egg yolks.
And accordingly insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the foreskin; and accordingly double the foreskin above at the part of the belly; and accordingly push the syringe into it; and accordingly push it in until it reaches the bladder, and that will cause the patient to be relieved from the desired cause, and not made as such according to this order, but rather the way it goes to tortuosity.
And accordingly stretch the thread with the lanolin little by little, because the urine will soak the lanolin.
And accordingly extract that and make for urine cure, and use syringe, do not cease to do so and use syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient obtains relief.
Chapter LIX.
On the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clampseed and similar instruments which are in accord with that.
When ulceration or apostema occurs in the bladder, or blood congestion in it, or it is constricted by pouring, and you want to make it distill with waters and medicines, then accordingly use an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
except that at the extremity of it there is a stopper, so it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like times.
In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that oppresses it, without addition, until when some cause is pulled out by the humidities, it will be pulled out, and when it is expelled, with water it will be pulled out, and when it is expelled long, as the clampcedra does to which naphta is poured in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to provoke humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and pull out with that water which is poured into the upper parts, because the humidity is pulled into the concavity of the clampcedra.
And accordingly insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the foreskin according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and accordingly pour out the humidity with water which pours out, because that humidity comes to the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
The form of the cathartic instrument with which the bladder is cathartized, and it is this form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, the head being similar to a small feather, and with a thin cane inserted into the ligature.
And accordingly take the bladder of motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to cathartize in the bladder, and accordingly tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and warm up that humidity over the fire.
And accordingly insert the extremity of the cathartic instrument into the foreskin.
And accordingly place your hand on the bladder with the humidity stretched downwards until the patient feels that that humidity has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then accordingly take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that all around its entire circumference; and accordingly insert a strong thread into those holes, just as they are revolved; and accordingly add the circle in such a way that it is added also to the other parts, so that you pause on that which you want of the humidities, oils, and waters.
And accordingly tie that to the instrument and make it like you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the Extraction of Fear.
We have already said in the division the species of fear and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between fear generated in the lungs and fear generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
And we have said about the fear in which one can perform an operation with hand and section.
And the fear generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
And you will narrate it with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that fear generated in the bladder mostly appears to children; and among its signs is that the urine that comes out of the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient trembles his foreskin, and many times looks pale, and accordingly is dressed; and with this you will find the tail in moles of those.
And it is easier to cure children of that until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure the elderly. But in young people, it is easier for this reason because it is between those.
And of that which fear is greater and cure is more easy; And if there is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that to cleanse the patient with a cathartic instrument which extracts all the fissure that is in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes hinders the formation of fear by the investigation of him.
And accordingly be present the patient with their feet and be comforted and strengthened by rest for so that fear may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or sometimes jump from one place to another.
And accordingly make that person sit between your arms prepared, and those of him are left with his things, for so that the bladder is made to decline entirely to the posterior parts.
And accordingly pour out all that and everything outside.
Therefore, if you feel fear in the space, then accordingly you should crouch down soon with section on him.
And if you do not feel completely the presence of his touch, then accordingly it is necessary that you anoint with oil the said indication of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or a young adult in full bloom, and insert it into their anus. And pour out fear until it stays behind your said indication. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And accordingly press on that with your said indication, and push it out into the posterior parts outside of the location from which you took the section.
And command the minister to press on the bladder with her right hand; and command another minister to extend the legs upwards with her left hand, and with her other hand to relax the cord which is below the legs, in a part of the location where the section is being made.
And accordingly insert a spatula which is incident to this form: And accordingly insert a spatula which is incident to this form:
And know that of the fear there is some which has an angle and margin, for which the emission of it is made difficult by this.
And of that fear there is one which resembles a grain, and is round, and is made for easier emission.
Therefore, if it is this type with angle and margin, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not so, then accordingly you must generate on that, or strengthen on that with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be like a file with which you strengthen on fear, and do not escape from there; or insert below that subtle instrument with curved extremity.
But if you cannot do so, then accordingly you should amplify the hole a little bit, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off the strength with vitriol powder.
But if the fear is more than one, then accordingly at first you will push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and insert it on that; and accordingly push in a little bit above that; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
And if it is great fear, then ignorance is that you insert that with great section, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: or that they die or that they are unable to undergo continuous urine distillation, therefore where the location is not entirely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture with razors into which it extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And pause on that cloth infused in oil and vinegar, or in rosy oil and water, for so that the apostema may be calmed.
And accordingly lay the patient on his back, and do not loosen the ligature for three days.
And when that has been loosened, wrap the wound with water and some oil, and accordingly cure it with divine ointment and devilish balsam until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs apostema, acute and corrosive, and of that it appears as if blood is congealed in the bladder with frost, and because of that urination is forbidden (and this is known by the egress of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said indication into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
And accordingly wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, with what is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And accordingly in all the hours of your cure, you should lie down with both the legs and adjust the medicines which are paused on the wound.
And if the fear is small and is in the head of the foreskin, and is fixed there, and emission of urine is prohibited, then accordingly cure that with what you recommended before reaching section, for many times accused by this cure; and now I have tried it too, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron alloy, whose form is as follows:
with a triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
And accordingly take the thread and tie it to that foreskin below the fear, for that reason that it may not return to the bladder.
And accordingly insert the iron into the foreskin, perforating with ease until the perforator comes to that fear. And accordingly turn the perforator with your hand in that fear little by little, and you will make the perforation of it until you make that other part penetrate; for the urine is soon abolished.
And accordingly press your hand on that which is remaining of the fear from the outside part of the foreskin, for that is tightened, and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not adapted to your equipment for some reason that prohibits it, then accordingly tie a thread below the fear, and another thread above the fear. And accordingly insert yourself on the fear in that foreskin between two ligatures. And accordingly extract it. And accordingly loosen the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the fear, except that it may not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, so that when the thread is loosened near the emission of the fear, the cord returns to its place and covers the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you when you have tied the thread above, that you lift the cord to the upper parts, or that you return to your previous complement, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of Fear from Women.
Fear in women is rarely generated.
But if fear appears in some of them, then it is difficult to cure it and is prohibited by many methods.
One of their reasons is that the woman is very ashamed.
And the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who is well-versed in the art of childbirth and who would deliver herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or who has no husband.
The third reason is that you cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art, especially the operation with hand.
And the fourth reason is that the location of the section on fear in women is too far from the location of the fear, so you need a preceding section, and in this there is fear.
But if necessity prompts you to this, then accordingly it is necessary that you take a midwife who is well-versed and not easily found.
But if you are deprived of her, then accordingly look for a midwife who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman matron who has been initiated in the art of women, or a woman who has divided from this art.
Therefore, present her and command her to do all that you will tell her from the beginning of the inquiry on fear; which cause is that she should look if the woman is chaste, then accordingly put your said indication in her rectum and desire the fear.
Therefore, if you find that, cut it below your said indication, and then command her to insert it on that.
But if she is not chaste, then accordingly command the matron to insert her said indication into the anus of the patient and inquire about the fear, since she will place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with a good compression.
Therefore, if you find that, then accordingly it is necessary to gradually relax that from the orifice of the bladder down to the lower parts with the summit of her virtue until it reaches the rectum of the wound.
And accordingly insert it on that opposition of the majority of the anus to the rectum of some part so that the fear is in that part, and the said indication of yours not be relaxed from the fear cut off below.
And the section should be small at first; and accordingly insert the ruler on that section, and if you feel the fear, then adjust to section according to the quantity which you know will cause the fear to be driven from there.
And know that the species of fear are many: for some are small and great, and lion-like and harsh, and long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you know how many species there are of it by this which you signify on what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust with vitriol powder on that location and keep it for one hour until the blood is stopped, and accordingly return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
And make sure to prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of fear from men, for that reason that you will be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the instrument inserted, then accordingly you pause powder on that location and strengthen it with powders and strictures descending, and do not iterate this; and leave the fear alone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die. And accordingly cure the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of blood has ceased after some days, and the location is well, then accordingly you return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
On the Section on Hernia in the Abdomen.
Hernia in the abdomen is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white apron which is below the cord of the genitals containing the urine, and is called a ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the own apron which nature has prepared for the urine in the part of the bladder, until it is full and another urine; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white apron which we have said, and it is not that but a taut cord.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, for that reason that it flows out from them this matter, and sometimes it happens through a blow made on the genitals.
And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it either declines to citrine or sanguine, or red, or is blackish feculent, or white watery, and that is what is most.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is so: for if it is in the white apron which we have said, then accordingly the apostema is rounded declining a little towards length, and appears like the figure of urine, and shows the genitals, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the own apron, then accordingly the apostema is rounded with the part of urine and by that one estimates that it is another urine.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white apron, then accordingly it is cut off below the sentiment.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then accordingly you try out the color of the moisture in the apostema by inserting a stick from which the form is preceded; and according to that which is found in the vestige of the stick, judge what it is below.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then accordingly it is necessary that you command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes fill up his body.
And accordingly lie on your back on some cause a little above, and pause below him many cloths.
And accordingly sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, which will extend her hand to one or two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the navel.
And accordingly take a spatula late and cut the cord of the genitals in half through the middle location, to the length almost up to the pubic bone.
And be made the section according to equal measure distant from the line which should be drawn on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white apron inclusive.
And excise that, and observe, and be cautious for yourself that you do not insert it; and your excision with which that is excised by partition below, so that it is suspended in the urine more and subtly scrutinize the excision according to the quantity possible.
And accordingly pierce the white apron full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And accordingly separate between two lips of the section with uncles, and stretch the white apron to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals inclusive, and insert the white apron in that manner which is possible for you. And insert it with its totality or in pieces, and more so the subtle sides, for if you do not scrutinize the insertion of him carefully, there is no surety that the water will not return.
But if the urine proceeds from that outside of its cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white apron, return to it, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suturing, and accordingly cure it just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the urine corrupted by another disease, then accordingly it is necessary that you loosen the vessels which are sore the suspender, and extract the urine, and accordingly cure it with what we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then you do it.
And accordingly you wash away the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and pause before another wool which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the navel; and pause above folded cloths and powders, and bind those above with a ligament according to this form:
and accordingly two cloths are pressed and filled with Carmenated wool according to this likeness; and the extremities are made with those which are premuted of cotton or wet wool, and added to the structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the anus to the thigh, and the second takes from the part of the pubic bone, and two extractions above two cresses below and two other extractions above two garters, and all the structure is adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauterizer in the place of section with iron; and it is that you take a cauterizer cutlery subtle and insert it into the cord of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recounted, until the white apron containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cauterizer according to this form: and it is assembled in Greek letters.
And accordingly pierce through that white apron, and ignite until all the humidity is exhausted.
And accordingly stretch the white apron with uncles, and excise with uncles, and excise with a subtle cauterizer ignited; and insert that into what is possible for you until it radiates all of it; and be cautious not to let the fire touch the urine.
And you know that this operation is more saved and longer in terms of blood flow, and better than an operation with section.
But if it happens to you that an apostema is caught in the hour of section or at the hour of cauterization, or blood flow, then accordingly it is necessary that you cure which contrariety makes for you by that, with a treatment which is suitable for him according to what has been said.
But if the patient is poor and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then accordingly administer perforation according to what we have recommended here; and it is when you are certified by this signification that the hernia is watery.
Then accordingly you should make the patient lie on some elevated ceiling, and pierce the apostema in the lowest part of him with a spatula late, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the aperture wide enough for all the water to flow out.
And accordingly pause on the place cotton and bind it and leave it, in order that the remaining water may flow out. And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is against the flow of water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason because the white apron in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water, then accordingly it is necessary to put into the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropisies, the form of which is preceded; or adjust a small one in the opposite part of the wound.
And you know that the water returns, and is accumulated accordingly for about 2 months or thereabouts; and when it is accumulated, then accordingly it should be pierced according to that manner of procedure, in order that the patient may thus pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the Section about Fleshly Hernia and its Cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia there is fear of being lost to perdition in greater dispositions; therefore, it has been seen by me the dismissal of him and being saved through that which is better.
And you should remember the operation in this case and the species of the apostemes.
Therefore, I say that the apostemes are born in those whose genitals are composed and it is made so by many causes: or by acute and bitter superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by impact.
And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a grave apostema.
And very often it is a fatty apostema, the color of which is dark, and there is no sentiment in him.
And sometimes it is caused by blockage of the arteries, and by inflammation of those so that already there is a recollection of him, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known by the distribution of the apostema when you compress it with those said ties; and it does not need for him to touch.
But that which is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from him for any reason, even with compression using those said ties.
And it is possible that on this species a section should be made and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the cord of the genitals, and accordingly stretch the urine to the upper parts, and extract that from the white apron, and deliver the suspender of the vessels, and bind them, and insert the suspender more than you deliver that of all part of the parts of the urine.
Therefore, if the urine is already consolidated with those fleshly matters, then accordingly it is necessary that you extract the urine and insert it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the white apron or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert it with a rounded insertion.
But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert all that is of him, and extract the urine just as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then accordingly fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and vinegar; and accordingly cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the Cure of Hernia which is of Vine.
Vine is an aposteme enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to perform movements, exercise, and walking.
And in the cure of this disease it is due to fear, because of which memory precedes it.
However, I must say that the operation in this case should be done according to what I did first.
And I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on an elevated ceiling; and accordingly, enfold the suspender of the testicles at the lower parts; and accordingly, take hold of the cord of the genitals with those said ties and vessels which are proved by the sheath; and hold these other ministers that you have, and extend them with a strong extension.
And accordingly insert into the spatula late with a cross section on the right side of the vessels, until the vessels are discovered.
And accordingly excise from all parts just as we have said in extraction of arteries which are on the temples.
And accordingly place in those an awl with a faithful double thread, and tie that to the first of the places where it occurs, and tie that other time at the last of them. And accordingly insert those in the middle location by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And accordingly cure the wound with the cure of other wounds in which you wish to be generated by that which falls from the vessels which nourish one of two genitals, for it is not bad because of this.
But if the vit affects all the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this means be joined with the vessels, in order to be deprived of all nourishment by the section of the vessels, and to be extinguished, or to become hardened because it will not be nourished by them.
Chapter LXV.
On the Cure of Hernia Intestinal.
The advent of this hernia is due to a section that takes place in the apron extended over the belly from the navel to the groin, so that bursting forth from one of those intestines.
And this rupture is either of the apron or of excess of him, and it occurs in two species due to many causes: or percussion, or by force, or by noise, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similarities.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the apron, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme which grows evenly within the prepuce because the apron compresses the intestine.
And the sign of him is when it is due to section of the apron, because at the beginning it causes sudden and violent pain; and it is an aposteme which appears differently underneath the apparent cord, and this is because of the intestine's protrusion, and his body goes out to the parts outside the apron.
And sometimes it is forgotten in the intestine's membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia cirrhotic.
And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it runs into the intestine's fissure, and here it is retained, and this is accompanied by great pain for the patient, and sometimes it makes a wicked and greater pain when it is pressed.
And in the cure of this disease's species with iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the mistake in that.
And the manner of the operation in that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his own hand to the parts outside of his conqueror if he obeys his returnment, and accordingly it should be enveloped over his back between your hands, and raise the patient's legs.
And accordingly take hold of the cord which cuts off the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and insert the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly place in two lips of the section uncis according to what is needed to open the section with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget from that, the urine should be forgotten.
And accordingly excise those apron-like things which are underneath the cord of the testicles, until the white hard apron is discovered in each part.
Then accordingly you should tie the said thread to that which is tied to the testicle, in that which is between the white apron and the one that is underneath the cord of the urine, and between the second apron, and absolve from that adhesion which is in the part behind the urine.
And accordingly take hold of the cord of the testicles with your left hand, and extend the white apron on top with your right hand, and raise the urine to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the urine upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And search for those said threads so that there may be no cause of the intestine being enveloped in the white hard apron. But if you find any cause from him, then accordingly you should tie that to the belly below.
And accordingly insert into the part underneath the cord of the testicles by section of which blood and pus will flow as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And accordingly apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and pause there; and apply the thread which we have recommended (and sometimes the white apron is cauterized, which we have said should be done at the incision of the wound to prevent blood flow, because many times those apostemes occur) and let the thread fall into place.
But if the mistake of him is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be poured, and pause over that until it falls according to what we have said.
And accordingly cure the wound with another cure of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been burnt by the cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you tie the vessels accordingly at the section on that side with felicitous ease; and accordingly cut in the middle location around the aposteme with water that brings about that, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the Disproportion that is made in the Navel.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the navel just as we have said, and protrudes the location.
And there is no reason for the genitals to be affected by the intestines at the genitalia; and if there is, it is slight; and returns to its normal state in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is an opening in the apron into which the intestine descends; and this occurs because of the extension of the apron which is in the navel just as we have said, which cause is that the apron is stretched, and accordingly it becomes softened and the location apostematises and protrudes.
And the cure for this is with a cauterizing tool just as the narrative of this has described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between his thighs, and accordingly cuts the location of the rupture of the apostemes protruding by section along the width in a quantity of three fingers.
And accordingly strengthen the white apron that is underneath the cord, until it is discovered.
And accordingly take the reed and pause it over the protruding location of the apron, and press it against the belly's fold.
And accordingly close the two protruding locations on the tip of the reed of the apron, and adjust them with a suture one to the other.
And accordingly extract the tip of the reed, and do not insert it into the apron completely, nor extend the urine, nor any other cause just as you would want to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And accordingly cure that with the cure of wounds, and by inserting the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the apron has contracted and the protrusion of rupture has not been adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, since it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between that is softened, and it is fitting for him to take care.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is taking care of him in his cure to make the patient lie on his back, and insert all the softened cord which is above the natural cord into it; and accordingly adjust two lips with a suture.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
And accordingly insert between the sutures; and accordingly cure by curing of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is written to me that I remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remind of it except by two manners, of which one is because of what this is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is asked about it, knowing the cure for him who suffers from it; and the other manner is that many times we have needed castration of other animals for our uses through them, just as with horses, and bulls, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: either by emasculation, or by incision at the section.
But in that which is done by emasculation, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie down in cold water until its genitalia are softened and relaxed, and hang. And accordingly take them with the help of your hand into where they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind by the touch.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And accordingly tie the suspenders, and cut on each side with one incision until two incisions process.
And accordingly cut those more than you would have excoriated. And do not leave any cause on those of the apron, except for the subtle apron which is above the vessels.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by emasculation, because emasculation leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
And accordingly cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On The Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: the one is when it appears as a space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure like that of a woman's vulva.
And sometimes from it flows urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women, there is a species: and it is that the vulva of a woman on her pubic mound is like two testicles of a man, almost all of them being placed outside just as the male genitalia are.
And the cure is of three species: two of men and one of women's. And it is that you must insert those adjusted flesh into where it escapes the impression of that, and accordingly cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Chapter XXI.
On Swelling and Flesh Elevation due to Causes of Women.
Swelling is slightly adjusted on natural causes until it becomes exhausted and makes the regulation firm; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and penetrates into coitus.
Therefore it is necessary for you to take the excess of swelling with your hand or with a tool and insert it.
And do not stop in inserting, especially at the pubic region, so that there may not be a flow of blood.
And accordingly cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrificity of the mare until it fills it, and slightly rises to the outer parts according to the shape of a hen (and for this reason some first call this "diseased swelling"); therefore it is necessary for us to insert as we insert swelling, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On The Cure of Ulceration.
Ulceration is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated, or if it is slightly torn. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not being adjusted or by subtle apron or thick apron.
And it is caused either in the pubic region of the mare, or in its sides, or at the highest part of it, or at the lowest part of it, and prohibits coitus and engagement and childbearing, and very much prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observation of the uterus, if the opacity is apparent, you can diagnose; but if it is not apparent, you must search for it with those said fingers or with a reed.
But if the opacity is due to subtle apron and is placed on both lips, then you must cut and tear it.
And it is that you pause over the two lips of dust, and accordingly pause those said indications on both sides.
And the woman should be on her back, her arms extended, and accordingly extend both lips with force until that subtle apron is broken and the opacity is opened.
And accordingly take linen and soak it in oil and pause that over the location, and make the patient lie down at home for a day so that the inserted location is not consolidated.
But if the apron is thick and dense, it is necessary for you to insert that with a spatula or with a mulberry leaf.
But if the opacity is due to edema, then suspend that with a tool, and insert it.
And be familiar with the medicines that stop bleeding without causing injury, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and essence, adjusted with white of egg.
And accordingly administer a leaden cannula that is wide enough so that the wound does not become slightly consolidated.
And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
And accordingly be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents happen in the natural birth of other flesh, and accordingly it is necessary to insert according to this manner. But if it is due to gangrenous aposteme, there should not be any opposition with iron in any manner at the aposteme which is in the mare.
Chapter LXXIII.
On The Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Botch that occur in the Vulva of Women.
Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the orifices of many veins until those vessels are corrupted and continue to bleed continuously; and as old hemorrhoids become worse and are made worse by their throats.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and will say also which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and throats when they are in the pubic region of the mare and do not appear to the sense, then in those there should not be made cure with iron.
But those that are in the orifice of the mare above which one can sense, are those that are cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and accordingly extend her thighs with forceps, or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And accordingly powder is spread over those to dry the flows of blood from one of the insertive powders that cause no injury, such as aconite and similar to those.
And accordingly press her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make that person sit in a decoction of Sumatra and Scorzonera of millet, and Gualas and similar plants.
And accordingly take wheat flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and make a poultice with water on the back of him.
And if the blood is absorbed, it is good; and otherwise, make adhere two bellows to the breasts with scarification.
And accordingly take linen and submerge that in the juice of Colocynthis or in the juice of Arnoglossum or in the juice of Guaiacum mixed with vinegar, and make adhere to the location; and accordingly cure the location with poultices until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On The Perforation of Accidental Wound in the Mare.
Many species of accidental wounds occur in the mare, such as gangrenous and apostematic, ulcerative and adhesion-like, erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids, and rough and other apostemats. And I have already said these diseases and their species, and their signs, and the cures for them in the division.
And it is necessary for you to say in this treatise of gangrenous aposteme which occurs in the mare when one of the apostemats is healthy, and if you want to know how the operation is done on him with iron.
Therefore it is necessary for you to consider if the pain of the aposteme in its beginning is acute with percussion and fluxing and fever, and sometimes that colorizes and if one senses on that location a sensation, then do not cut with perforation of him, and cure that with water that helps on maturity until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And accordingly it is necessary for you to make the woman lie down on a pillow that has two pillows; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the lowest part of the belly, and her thighs be expanded, and pause her arms below her nails, and tie each one with a string to water conveniently.
And accordingly the midwife should follow the right way and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mare is covered, the form of which will come in those causes that are done accordingly.
And accordingly when you want to administer this instrument, make sure that it is in the ray of the pubic region of the mare of the woman, and what enters the instrument into the mare does not exceed the pubic region of the mare and lead the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the pubic region of the mare, then it is necessary for you to sprinkle powder on the texture of the pubic region of the mare so that it prohibits the entry of any instrument into the pubic region of the mare.
And accordingly you should pause the vertebra that runs on the instrument above and below, and the one who ministers should hold the instrument and turn the vertebra until it is opened the opening of the mare.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched by the hand and is rough and moist, then it is necessary for you to dry that with a spatula of fat.
And when the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary for you to pause in the wound a poultice submerged in red oil or green oil which has some styptic properties; and pause the pressure in the section of the pubic region of the mare.
And pause outside the mare and on the pubic mound a clean linen cloth submerged in water in which marigolds are steeped.
And accordingly be cured within two days with poultices that correspond to that until it is healed.
And sometimes the mare and the wound are washed in this way that is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly with water in which rye or long-leafed Aristolochia has been steeped, and then returns to poultices.
And if the wound is opened in the mare with pus, then it is necessary for you to be prohibited from the cure of him with iron, having cured that with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to medicate abnormal births when they occur according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should know at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and thus when you see the woman expelling at the parting points below and desires to smell the air, and on top of that she is relaxed because what comes out of her is from the part, and hastens the emergence of the fetus, then you should know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emergence of the baby over its head, and the umbilical cord with that or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, as you see those signs, then it is necessary for the belly of him to be compressed so that the fetus descends slightly when it comes out over its head, and then the umbilical cord should be cut off from those superfluous parts with good cleansing.
But that which is another part is non-natural and not permissible, because when the fetus is emerged over its feet and the body of him is emerged before his head and his feet, and one hand or at the foot.1 or is emerged the head of him and one hand or at the belly of him, and very much it is converted over his neck, and similar to the figures of him that are not permissible.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to beware of error and deception.
And I show you the whole figure of those, and what engine is in them for so that it is meant by this and stands on top.
When the child is emerged over its head by natural excitement, and it is very vehement on the woman and is made to part difficultly, and sometimes the virtue of her is already debilitated, then make that person sit down, or what women have him, and evaporate the vulva with fennel juice and with warm oil.
And accordingly introduce the midwife between the said small spatula and the slit with that umbilical cord, or cut that off with her own nail until the flow of water is in her which is in her of humidity. And press the woman's belly until it descends the child.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be anointed with mullein and fenugreek juice mixed with camomile.
And accordingly command him to her, and command the anointing, that it be compressed and make her yawn with conditions; and hold his mouth and nose for one hour, because the child will soon forget it.
And if the two hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce those with small ease gradually. But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a pillow and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the pillow on the earth; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the hands are not returned and the child dies, then insert those and extract the remnant of the child or tie its body to the hand with cloth and extract that in equanimity, because it will soon be forgotten.
When the child emerges over its feet, then it is necessary to push those into them, and accordingly transform the small child, and accordingly equalize that, and accordingly take one foot of him and stretch those little by little.
But when they are emerged into the thighs, then it is necessary to command him to be expelled, and make her yawn with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then it is necessary to return the small child gradually until he is paused according to a natural figure, because that will soon be forgotten with a lighter emergence.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recounted, then take mullein and dissolved gum, and beat everything together in the mortar for good beating, and accordingly line up with water the vulva of the woman, down below the belly. And accordingly make that person sit in warm water until she achieves relief from her hypochondria.
And when the parts below of him are softened, then make to him a sub-fumigation of myrtle and sub-pause that to him. And when the sub-fumigation has been done for an hour, then make her sit down on a pillow, and accordingly make her yawn and stretch her mouth, and take that away from her, and press the lower part of the belly of her with light compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Emergence of the Child Lateralistically Hanging from One of His Hands. Be gentle in reducing the hand of him, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and conceive the thighs of him with strong concussion, and accordingly administer those remedies which we have recounted and recommended with mullein.
And if the childbirth is completed, then make her sit down on a pillow, and accordingly study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make the woman yawn and command him to compress himself until he is forgotten.
Emergence of the Child with expanded hands and the flesh of him at the two sides of his right shoulder. It is necessary for the midwife to have the hand of the child and accordingly turn that little by little, and equalize that with ease.
And when it is and what is equalized, then pause on the vulva of her with that which we have recounted, namely oil and mullein.
And accordingly command him to yawn little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit down on a pillow and command her to be inclined over the right side, and accordingly command him to be compressed; and make her yawn with conditions. Exit of the prepared fetus onto the right side.
When it emerges in a horrible manner from the mare according to this method, take note, and then insert the umbilical cord with your own nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of him, then insert that of the umbilical cord, in order that it may not be retained and die.
And accordingly push the child into the parts below until it is paused according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself for some time, and if God wills it, the child will soon be forgotten with a lighter emergence.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that sometimes twins are born, and some times three or four, but this is rare and not to be expected; however, there are causes natural, and not living.
And among those, whether they are multiple or single, one umbilical cord, and they are separated by ciphac, distinguish them from the ligament in the navel of each of those And some times they are forgotten thus as one fetus for natural emergence lighter, and some times they are born with non-natural emergence thus as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and proceed to what we have said about non-natural figures, then you should cure those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and in delay, and is skilled according to all figures as it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and Aborted.
Some weeks are formed in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten days; and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman aborts at the seventh day, and another at the tenth day, which was caused by measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this must be in the science of the midwife because it is a little similar to what has been said, and therefore pause there as much as is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of the Fetus when it is Dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not yet emerged, and you are forced to use operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has a healthy virtue and is not afflicted with any of the accidents by which peril is feared for her.
Then it is necessary that the woman be laid down on her back over the bed, and her head inclined downwards, and her thighs elevated.
And the minister should hold her in two parts or be tied down on the bed for that reason, so that the body of her does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And accordingly moisten the mouth of the mare with warm oil, and mullein, and fenugreek, and sesame seed.
And accordingly the midwife should bring her hand with those oils and mullein, and accordingly enter her hand with ease into the mare, and accordingly seek out the exact location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
And finding the convenient location: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to emerge on its head, and accordingly place your fingers in the following locations: on the ears of him, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of him, or in the places proper to the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
But if the emergence is on the feet of him, then in the pentalion or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to have the fingers of the right hand and pause the curvature of him at that location which is between the digits of the left hand, and enter the hand with ease and place the fingers in one of those locations which we have said, until you reach the cause of the boyd.
And accordingly pause and place another finger, or the third if necessary, in the opposition of him, to attract equalization, and not be extended according to his straightness only.
And it will be good for the whole part, for that reason the emergence of him will be alleviated thus as is done in tooth extraction for the eradication of him.
And it is necessary in him that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if some part of him is retained, then the midwife should bring some of his fingers with oil and enter those expertly and turn with water what is retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers should be pushed forward until the location where it is more above; and make so that all the fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is emerged before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and accordingly extract that until all is forgotten, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
And so it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is contraction in the emergence, or if water is adjusted in the head of him, then it is necessary that you insert between the digits a spatula with spines and cut off the head and extract the water, or use an instrument which is called "alundat", whose form will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And similarly do if the fetus has a large head by nature: and it is necessary that you insert it with an algemate, or take it with an alundat as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is emerged and contracted at the furcula, then it should be cut open until the humidity which is in the pit is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obedient to emergence, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the afterbirth of the belly is apoplectic or is in him with dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate that until the humidity which is in him flows out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of him is slight and the direction of him to the mouth of the mare is slight.
But if it is contracted in the belly and pit, then it is necessary that you extract that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and cut open the belly and pit until the water that is in them runs out.
But if the other members are stiff and turn back to the head, then put your right hand into it; but if the mouth of the mare is swollen, then insert your left hand into the harp and seek out that head, and attract it with the fingers until it enters the mouth of the mare, and accordingly enter one finger or two fingers into him and draw him with those.
And if the mouth of the mare is contracted by apoplectic catarrh which happens to him, then it is necessary that you do not trouble him with this; but rather administer effusion of humid and fatty causes. And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it should be punctured: and administer water as we have said in the living fetus.
And if this is not possible, then it should be inserted into pessaries, and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause behind the umbilical cord.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer water as we have said for the cure of apoplectic catarrh which happens to the mare.
And if bleeding occurs, then administer in aqueous stiptics and give the other cure.
And you have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and accordingly on that spot another embryo conceived, and accordingly the dead fetus is another. It happened to him, accordingly, after a long time an apoplectic catarrh in his navel; and it swelled until a foul odor began to emit.
And you were called upon to cure him, and treated him for a long time, and the wound was not consolidated.
Then you applied some emplasters of strong attraction to him, and extracted from him one bone, and accordingly passed several days, and extracted another bone; and I was too astonished, as in the womb there is no bone.
And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
So you cleansed the wound, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in her own miserable condition, and already living in such a way for a long time, cried out with a little breast.
And I did not consider it strange, but rather because in that is science and aid to what the physician has in his hand to administer cure.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertebrae with which the mare is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which are equated the free ones, to which equating are two vertebrae at the two extremities of two feet. However, this vertebra must be more subtle than the strictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood.
And the latitude of each foot is about two digits and the margin of each about one digit, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle part of the two feet are two adjustments of those fixed feet, which are already secured, of which the length is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is about two digits, or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the mare so that it is opened with them when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form similar to that, more subtle and lighter:
Be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps. However, at the end of it there are two adjustments like those times, and the length of these adjustments is about one palm, and the latitude of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the mare with those, then you should cause the woman to sit on a bed with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. And accordingly, over your hand with the instrument as you make it for forceps equalizing according to the quantity you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mare until she makes what you want.
The form of vertebrae which was said by the ancients:
Form of impulse by which the fetus is impelled:
Form of accommodation by which the great head is contained:
And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth at the end, just like times, and some times it is made long just like forceps according to this form, just like times, with teeth just like teeth of a reed into which it is inserted and contained. Form of accommodation few:
Form of finger having one spine:
Form of finger having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities at which the head is cut off:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, as it is easier to their operation and more necessary for men in proportion.
And do not neglect those instruments however small they may seem to you, because the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Of extraction of the umbilical cord.
When the umbilical cord is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you order the patient to retain her breath, and accordingly make her cough with conditions, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if by this means it is extracted, well it is.
And if not, then take a cloth and pierce it in the covering of a hole, and pause in that herb which is used to open the mouth of the mare, such as calamus and rue and anise and chamomile and Arab spices and cassia lignea and St. Andrew's. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause it over the fire.
And accordingly place a reed cane in the mouth of the mare, and keep it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mare.
And accordingly make her cough just as we have said, and the umbilical cord is expelled quickly.
But if this cure does not work and the umbilical cord is still retained, then you should order the midwife to submerge her left hand in samian oil or in a mixture of altaic herbs, and accordingly insert it into the confluence and seek out the umbilical cord, and when you have found it, take it and stretch it out gradually. But if it is annexed in the womb of the mare, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the umbilical cord, extract it little by little according to rectitude, so that the mare does not faint from the vehement attraction. But first, it is necessary to be made pliable on both right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mare is contracted, we have already recommended the cure by coughing and administering medicine with the cloth and herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recommended, then beware that you do not force anything over there in iteration of abstraction, but rather, it is necessary that what has emerged from him to the mouth of the mare lies at the edge of the woman's bed, and accordingly, plasterize it with a poultice and tetra-pharmacopeia; because that will make it rot away within a few days and be dissolved and expelled.
But when it rots, it is elevated to a bad authority on the head and stomach, and accordingly leads the patient astray; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to him.
But some of the Ancients have already experimented with sub-fumigation using nitre and dried figs.
Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated for retention of menstruation and umbilical cord:
Be made of bay or earthenware.
And be placed the slender extremity in the cleft and the broad extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the fire.
And keep that until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then iterate another.
Of cure for the child's unperforated anus.
Many children are born without anuses, those which have a subtle and opaque covering. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that subtle covering with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the lacet.
And accordingly, pause over that with wool infused in vinegar and oil; and accordingly, cure it with a poultice until it is settled.
But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then pause in the hole a reed cane for many days, and stop when the child will desire to relieve itself.
And if there is obstruction of the anus due to consolidation of wound or apoplectic catarrh; then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised, and accordingly be cured with the water we have said for the cure and with lead.
Of cure for the fistulae which are left behind.
The fistulae which are left behind in the departure, and which are lower than the navel and thicker on the one side or in the space of the one part, near the anus.
And it is a single fistula or several.
And when that nodule is old and flows with white or yellowish liquid, or subtle putridation, and sometimes some of these fistulae are penetrating.
And those that are penetrating are known by what comes out of them through egression and ventosity; and sometimes the patient uses the evacuation of egression, and very little comes out of those worms.
And some of those fistulae occasionally penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra of the penis; and some of those penetrating into the junction of the pelvis and into the notch of the coccyx.
And the way to know if a penetrating fistula is not penetrating is that you put your finger into the anus and then insert a subtle probe of earthenware or iron into the fistula when there is no resistance.
But if there is resistance in that, then insert into it a subtle probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all or there is no discharge of any kind, whether worms or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and accordingly apply the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra of the penis, then the significance of it is that urine will come out of that and prohibition of it at this point so that the place with medicine may be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the pelvis or bone and causing pain in the circulation, then the sign of it is that the probe will go in here if there is no resistance to the bone, and causing pain in the circulation of the departure; and that from it always putridation appears; and that no remedy is valid in that, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
And in all those penetrating fistulae there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is tedious and futile labor on the part of foolish doctors who are fixed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and what you have already proved.
And it is that the patient lies between two cushions over his back and elevates his legs up to them, so that the pelvis are inclined towards the belly of him, and accordingly insert a probe of lead or earthenware into the fistula if there is resistance, until you know the place where the probe will go in.
And if that makes the patient feel a sensation around the anus, then it is necessary that you put your finger into the anus.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already gone in and is penetrating, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and accordingly do not trouble yourself with it, as we have said.
But yet some say that it cures in some people at times.
And of the medicine by which one hopes for improvement in that is that you apply a subtle cauterizing fire according to the size of the fistula, as has been previously said, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and accordingly repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted fleshy tissues that are similar to the quill of an eagle have become united.
And accordingly cure that with wrapped calkins in parchment until all those adjusted fleshy tissues are united, and accordingly cure that with medicines generating and consolidating flesh, and if it is healed, well it is; and otherwise, then it is not healed at any time by other cures.
And if the probe goes in and does not penetrate into the anus which is in the rectum, and between that and the probe which is a velament of flesh or nodule, and sometimes the fistula opens up on the surface of the codena, then dry out the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe goes in, and by the probe is liberated and freed.
And accordingly, purify those fleshy tissues which are assembled like the quill of an eagle and do not remain for any reason.
But if the flow of blood comes and goes between you and your operation when you are purifying those fleshy tissues, then use the remedy that is easiest to apply with the least effort, which is cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: so it adjusts the adjusted fleshy tissues, and abscizes the blood by excessive humidity.
And accordingly cure that with wrapped calkins in parchment or in threefold cloth until the wound gets braised, and accordingly cure the wound with poultices of hard flesh that generate and consolidate.
And such medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when that is restored it is healed and you do not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has already gone into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
And therefore if you feel the probe and it is between you and her a velament of nodule or flesh, and is inclined towards penetration, then there is no operation in that but according to the way of faith and hope.
Which cause is to be administered in that place by one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry out that part until you achieve the conquest of it so that it becomes possible for you to insert some and the natural cure is achieved; and do not proceed with any drying out because you will not inscribe the lacert containing the anus, and it will occur over the patient's consent; and accordingly cure that with water as we have said, which will be quite healthy; or elongate that velament and dry out that part up to the prop of the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and accordingly purify those fleshy tissues that are in the section until you can make an incision; and accordingly strive to restore all the wound with drying out, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on the side of the anus, and it will be easier for the patient. And in some cases the fistula is closed by this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the anus around the surface of the body with the codena and on the margin of the anus, then take hold of a perforated extremity, which is like an awl that prepares the skin according to this form:
and insert it into that faithful wrapping of vein or around those; and accordingly insert the probe with faith in the fistula until you achieve the conquest of it.
But if it is penetrating into the margin of the anus proper to the inside, then you take out the vein from that hole as if you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave water for a day or two, and when more you insert the vein into the flesh, strengthen it until those fleshy tissues are inserted between the two extremities of the vein which fall.
And accordingly cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared for it, but not so much that it reaches the anus, because it is not your business to do that; and accordingly make it healed with water as we have said.
The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is punctured: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp at all on the other side, so that you do not insert what is not necessary, just like sometimes.
Of stitching of hemroids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemroids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus resembling like those of charcoal, or those which are like a grass of rashes. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them always and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in its extremities.
But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little moisture, from which flows a yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous pus, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is outside the anus is to command the patient to settle down and to be expelled into the anus until the anus opens and the hemroids appear before you. Then you will cut and suspend with scissors or whatever you have those on your fingernail, and accordingly cut off the roots of those.
But if the scissors are not taken to those because of the humidity and softening of them, then take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of cotton or with a woolen rag, and pull out those with the aforementioned fingers, and accordingly cut off those and powder some powders on top of them nearby the incision, so that they are adapted to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those as it is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. And accordingly cure those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then cleanse the patient with a small amount of cistern in the cistern where there is slight biting, and wash him with that water that is in the anus and that will obey evacuation slightly when the patient is evacuated.
But if the hemroids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your fingernail or with scissors, and cut off those, and accordingly cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
And whoever will have incision, should administer suture of theirs according to this method: take a faithful wrapping and insert that into the needle and accordingly pull out the hemroids at the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread in the part most left behind of the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemroid with a strong stitch, and accordingly remove the thread and extract the needle.
And do this with all of them, and leave one of those alone and do not cook it, so that the superfluity of blood flows from that.
And accordingly place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the anus, and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And accordingly leave that until it is hardened, and when it has hardened, cure those with poultices or with another cure until they are healed.
And since they are so old and not valid in that medicine, then you must scrape those with the point of a spatula or with your fingernail until they become moist and the scab above is prevented from forming; and accordingly cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must scrape those with reason more violent than the first time until there is no blood and they are exfoliated; and accordingly cure those until they are healed.
Know that Almesmir is the key, and it is not so unless there are notes redone according to the color of the body resembling a head of clavicle, and it is made throughout the body and most in the parts left behind the weights and the dits, and thereby one must follow the pain through the love.
And then it is necessary to cut off that which is in the circle of the key, and be held with forceps or scissors, and be eradicated from its root; and accordingly cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
But of verruca is a small rough wart-like prominence that is fistulated and rounded on the surface of the body, and many times it appears in children's hands.
And the cure for that is to spread and cut off that, or to strengthen it with a thread or with a cloth until it hardens. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
But a formic is a small prominence that is fatty or fistulated large on the surface of the body moving towards the anus, and when the heat finds it, it appears like a biting of an ant, and is made around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a quill of goose or of wolverine, and it be strong, and place it on the formic until it contains the circle of the quill around the parts of it; and accordingly revolve your hand with the quill until you cut off what is in the circuit of the formic, and place it in the anus of the flesh, and thereby eradicate the formic from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a clay or iron quill according to this form:
Be the upper part of the quill thin and subtle, not perforated, wrapped in such a way that on the said part of it is ablated and the rotation of it.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterizing.
The Form of the Instruments that are administered to give Cistern.
Sometimes cistern is made of silver or lead or clay melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made with small and large instruments according to those which are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children is small; and of those whose anus is rough or painful, their cisterns are small.
The Form of Cistern Great and Little.
The head of the quill above, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and there should be a distinction at the place where the bag is tied just like sometimes.
And the extremity of it most below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (so it is not open) very much like a lion, going back to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger than small.
And the bag should be in which medicines from the bladder of an animal or from sheep's wool are placed, and the root of it should be a palm.
And it should be pierced with many holes just like it is rolled up; and if the space which is between the holes is as thick as said.
And accordingly insert into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads, or around those; and adjust the bag with that; and when it is placed in there the bag should be tight at the head of the cistern between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and accordingly cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And accordingly the patient should be raised over his back, and lift his legs up high and place something flat underneath it on which men or a lansol rest; and accordingly anoint the extremity of the cauter with oil or album of wheat or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and accordingly insert that into the anus with ease, and accordingly the minister should take the bag and expel that with two hands and sometimes with vehemence until it is evacuated in the bedpan all that is in the cistern; and accordingly remove the cistern and the patient will lift his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to sleep, let him sleep as long as he can; and if he sleeps with that all night, it is even later in judgment.
But if you cauterize that in diseases of stool evacuation and the patient's sleep is disturbed, then you must repeat the cauterization until he is cured.
And if in the anus there are hemroids or apoplastic lesions, then you should use a cistern that is very subtle and lion-like, from among those with which children are cisternized.
The Cure of Plagues.
And so I have said in the division of the cure of plagues what is necessary for the free man, and I say thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore I say that plagues are diversified according to what the plagues are made and according to the place on which the plagues are placed.
And the causes by which many times plagues are made are just like a blow of pepper, or incision of space or of cote, or percussion with lance, or with fist, or with arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are like a plague which lies on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the cure for some plagues by which you pause that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
And I begin with the plagues of the head, simple ones, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the fourth chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow of pepper or similar, and if the wound has already opened up just a little bit and it is a big plague and you fear that there may be an apostema forming, then you should take care of it and perform cephalic bleeding as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract blood from it according to the quantity of its virtue, unless there are other causes prohibiting bleeding, especially if the blood that has flowed out of the plague is little.
And perform the bleeding on the opposite side of the affected part; and beware that the patient does not get filled up with blood, nor eat nor drink strong foods.
But if there is any prohibition from the minority, then it should be reduced in food and not approach meat nor wine.
And place on the plague, if an apostema is forming cautiously, apply oil of roses or wine in which it is stipticated.
But if it is certain that an apostema is forming cautiously, then place on the plague, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommended earlier in small amounts.
And if the air has already changed that, then place on it some poultice until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is due to incision of space and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pus, then adjust those with a suture according to how I recommend for the suturing of theirs.
But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and pen, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensor, then cut off that and accordingly cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in its proper place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grossness: caps and forms like theirs, until they are composed.
And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all that putrid part and remove it, and accordingly cure what remains.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that one which is not abscessed, then cut off that with a spatula or tie it; and if necessity demands that what we have said does not come to pass, then you should cauterize in order for the blood to be abscessed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; therefore you can powderize on those this powder, for it will consolidate that before the air changes those.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil from a dragon's wound, one part, blood of a dragon, two parts, and non-extinguished charcoal, three parts; mix it all well and grind it finely, and fill the wound with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres well to that place, and coagulates with the blood.
And accordingly strengthen that above with poultices and apply it, and do not remove it while it is like this, for the medicine has not yet been absorbed by it until it is healed.
And sometimes make this alone, when you are not present with dragon's blood and dragon's wound.
And then do this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause over those and compress them, and on fresh wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then you should not think about the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, by applying poultices that are suitable for them, or by applying fine powder made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until a poultice forms; and accordingly cure those with another remedy until they are healed.
But if it occurs in a fracture of the bone, and is small, then you should extract that with gauze.
And I say the cure for fractures of the head in this way which follows.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is injured, then if it is a nerve, do not intervene with poultice, but rather avoid curing it with anything that causes vehement stiptication, just like vinegar and egg whites, which are like vitriol and similar to theirs, which hurt the nerves and contract that. And do not apply anything to the wound that is too cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the highest part of all the members.
And if the wound is cured with gentle medicines, just as it is washed with lukewarm water, some times infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and thus when it is washed with lukewarm water and other parts are softened according to this manner, and poultices moist.
But if the wound is large, then administer a suture, or tie off the edges of it, and accordingly cure that with poultices until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the poultice, then pierce that in the most suitable location.
But if an artery has been cut in the wound and blood is flowing, then separate or dry it out, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessity demands that too.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have been cut or all, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; above equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, and accordingly strengthen that with decent stricture, and leave it for a few days; and accordingly cure that with poultices in which there is stiptication and excitation until it is healed.
But if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then pierce it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can from them; and what is not removable, leave that until the wound settles, and be separate and the excrescence from it be alleviated.
And if the wound is fresh, then powderize over it with the powder that I recommended. But if there is a fistula in the wound, then cure that with what will be remembered later in its own chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or a cote and sometimes the depth of the wound, then consider more if there is ventilation in the wound when the patient breathes; know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it at the first hour, and not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and aches the patient, but rather pause on it an attractive poultice, and remove it twice a day.
And if the poultice is not present, then you should pause on the orifice of the wound with a cloth so that it sucks out what there is of the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that the water that is in it is adjusted.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm nor trembling of the heart nor constriction of the artery, and sometimes other good dispositions from it, then know that the wound is saved; and accordingly cure that with cauterization and another remedy until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is delayed, and all time has opened up, then know that a fistula has been formed; cure then that according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is due to incision of space or cote, and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what has preceded it by suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has made an impression in the bone, and there are fragments of bone, then pierce the wound and extract those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound settles, so that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And as for other wounds that occur in other limbs, the judgment in curing is the same as what we have said.
Of the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and you must know that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to put their intrusion back into its place soon, for it opens up and becomes engorged so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that one there is no difficulty in reducing the bowels, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are necessary in sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other sutures proper communicate with the other wounds, but nevertheless are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you any exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowels has been made by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is done in one of two manners: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the bowels have become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore when this is so, it is necessary that you scrape that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or that you soak it in water with squinant, and cypress, and spic, and wrap the bowels around that until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I find that this has a stiptic quality, and it is better than hot water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when you find that the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the bowels with water in which there are high and bitter roots, for by this the instrument of it with little cause.
But if the instrument of it is not suitable for this cure, then you should divide the disruption into small parts with an instrument which has been sharpened by cutting bloodless wounds.
And the first cure is better when it is proper and not too dry, and there is no occupation in drying out too much necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, see the shape of it:
The one part of it is twisted sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not so subtle as a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the bowels are outside, it is necessary that their reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible above, for better.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his hips higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head of him and his feet higher than the remaining parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and consideration at that point for so long as the part in which the wound is located is higher than the other.
And similarly it is necessary that you administer this to great wounds and middling wounds.
And in small wounds, pause on what is prepared for you, and then make the minister to be between your most trusted servants, one who has the disruption all with his hand and adjusts the edges of it, and then uncover from that to that which knows some cause another.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count the needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, so that you do not put faith in the two ends of the cord, with the two ends of the ciphac that is left outside the cord, until it penetrates from that part; and you have already added two ends of the cord and two ends of the ciphac, and thus four orders are made.
And accordingly strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and accordingly add the two edges and the wound by decent addition; and accordingly leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that place, and accordingly tie that with a thread as if it were a first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed all the constriction of the wound.
And the needles should be middling between coarseness and subtlety, because the fine needles barely cut into the flesh; and the coarse ones are of difficult instrument in the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be middling in subtlety and coarseness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in both ends of the cord at once, for fear that the flesh will be cut too little and the wound will become inflamed before its consolidation.
And do not prolong the suturing so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
And accordingly insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's rest in his bed; and pause on the suturing with poultices spread out from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, because they suffice in the suture of them with one needle or two or around those.
But the second suture is common: it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped evenly in subtlety and coarseness.
And accordingly, when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, reduce the needle to that middle part from which it began, in order that the thread may be pulled back from the most elevated part of the wound to the wound itself, in order that the suture may be according to the suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I cured the wound which had occurred to a man in his belly, which was wounded with a cote, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the bowel from the middle location, and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that from where the bowel had been perforated by the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healed; and accordingly, he lived for many years and was converted to his former disposition.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle of God, for you did not cure him with poultice, because it was in a place where poultice was not found nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound with a cloth twice a day and ablution assiduous with water of honey until he was healed.
But I will tell two species of suture proper, according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And therefore, as the needle pierces into the cord and meets the lacertz according to rectitude and length of all the body, and leaves the end of the ciphac in which you inserted the needle; and make it penetrate on the other side through the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the mihat.
And then, when you have made it penetrate once, you should make it penetrate again on the same side in that middle extremity of the mihat from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the ciphac which is in this position, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity of the inside part to the outside part.
And make it penetrate with that penetration of yours, with which you make it penetrate into the ciphac in the extremity of the mirror, which is on the part of it, until all of that penetrates.
And accordingly, begin on this side of the said cord and cut off that which is at the end of the ciphac in the other side, and pull out the needle from the cord which penetrated, and accordingly reduce it to that cord and tie the end of the ciphac which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and pull out that part of the cord which is on the part of it.
And do this once and another time, and do it again one more time, until you cut off all that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you cut off with a suture of skin, in which you cut off the skin, and so that you cut off the ciphac once on one side of the extremity of the cord, and then leave it there until you have completed it.
But the second species of suture proper, which you call Gualia, and this is according to the word of God and by his recommendation, is that you cut off according to semilitut with which some medics cut it off, in such a way that they add all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of one side of it and the extremity of the mirror to another extremity of it, and this is done according to what you recommend to yourself.
It is necessary that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own part from the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside in that same one, and leave two ends of the ciphac; and accordingly revolve the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two ends of the ciphac.
And accordingly, revolve those loops and make them penetrate from the inside to the outside in the two ends of the mirror, which are on the contrary side.
And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which was previously remembered.
This is the saying of Gualia.
And besides, some will say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these two one thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who cut off the skins evenly.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other locations of the belly.
But the judgment of medicine for a wound is judgment of other wounds.
The reason is that when you succeed in the wound recently with the patient's blood before it has altered that, and reduce the belly and cut off that and adapt that decently, then pause over that flesh-powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some poultices which are at your presence until they make a hard pressure and loosen the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and accordingly cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at your presence, then pause over that for some time, since it begins to grow hard, and cut off, and exchange that twice a day, just as I teach you, until it is healed, because you will not need other medication in many situations when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate to lesions in the main members, then it is necessary that you soak linen in good quality oil of tempering or rose oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places which are between the angles and leave those as they are.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your bowels, because many times this happens to be so, then it is necessary that you sterilize that with vinegar stiptic black water, and especially if the perforation has occurred in the bowel and has made an exit hole penetrating into the cavity of it.
And you know that what is from the large bowel is more easily healed than what is in the small bowels.
And it is of difficult healing because the bowel which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that enters into it completely; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of the body of it, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is a thread, and you succeed in getting it recently, then reduce that according to your rectitude with which you reduce the bowels evenly.
But if it has passed into the space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with thread on the location that is degraded from there, in order to bring back the flow of blood, because in the thread are veins and arteries.
And accordingly, insert there what is another binding, and pause the two ends of the thread pending from the left side of the wound, in order that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the cavity of the wound and emission of the flesh of the plague.
Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the bowel.
When a disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, because you saw that one who was wounded in his belly with a blow from a lance and had an old wound and made a fistula, and exuding pus and flatulence.
Then you began to treat the wound as if it were not confined in its healing, but rather ceased to be subtle and allowed that to be healed and the location to be consolidated.
And then you saw that the location was already consolidated, and you waited for the patient who had been injured in his belly; and he did not take any medicine because of this bad accident and remained in his usual habits eating and drinking, and accordingly went to the bath and was exercised in his own strength.
And some experienced ones will say that when you encounter a wound in the bowel and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take fromies of large caps; and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound and pause one fromie of those which has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore when you place it on top of them and strengthen its mouth, cut off the cap of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And accordingly, pause another fromie near the first one, and do not cease to make fromies one by one according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And accordingly, reduce that and close the wound; and those caps remain attached in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And already it is possible to bind the bowel with a subtle thread which is made from the bowel of an animal attached to it, because it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of these threads from the bowel, and it is very bare, and accordingly tie the end of it to the thread of binding, wrapped, and accordingly insert that thread into the needles and close with it on the bowel, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this manner of suture with fromies is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the small bowels, because then it is not just a matter of suture, but rather subtlety, and there is no healing of it completely.
On the cure of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound and apostema when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and grows a hard crust all the time and is not cut off, then, regardless of what member it may be in, universally it is called fistula and we call it abscess.
And fistula according to truth is a nodular abscess, hard, white, and painless, with which there is no pain and it is as if the cavity of the abscess were the penalty of the owl; and for this reason they called that "rizatz", i.e. penalty.
And it is in some men moist, which grows a crust; and the moisture is soon absorbed in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is more abundant, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And now I have shown all those causes, and their signs, and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that you know how to treat fistulas which are made by way of operation with me.
And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body, because some are fistulas that penetrate into the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the ciphac, or the bowel, or the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed by composition as is the case with the hand and foot; and those are which give proximity to the main member and its likenesses.
And therefore, that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-heal diseases, and does not receive healing, and its occupation with it is toil and ignorance.
And if some of the fistulas have a depth that does not reach those places I mentioned, and you wait and hope for its healing, and wish to understand it, then take a try with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the natural path, then explore it with the finger.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead, because lead with the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved in such a way that it follows the twisting.
And if the fistula has many horrible appearances, it is not possible for you to signify on it with a probe.
Then clean the orifice by its own orifices, because the moisture which you use to cleanse it flows through the other orifices and drains from them.
And accordingly, inquire exquisitely, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the fistula is distant or near, or if it is one of those many orifices that is situated above this entire sum of your strength, with your introspection, with which you reflect on the patient, and the invention of pain due to your compression with your hand on the location, and similar signs and causes of accidents affecting the apostema.
And when you have stood on all those causes with steadfast true understanding, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salubrious location, distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I teach you and say.
And now you should cleanse the fistula according to what was said before about the narration of it, and stop at that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or from the bone and its likenesses, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of long and deep depth, and follows its natural path, then you must insert it into the preon as far as possible for you, and accordingly, cleanse that from all its corrupted flesh; and accordingly, administer some wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
And thus, with that, make it so some times until the sharp medicine has corroded all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And accordingly, restore that with unguents which produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain about it, then you should inquire into that and cleanse it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is uncovered to you and it has some corruption and blackness, then you should remove that until all the corruption is removed; and accordingly, cure that with water which enters into it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and grows crust like before, then you should know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; and therefore, you will uncover it again, carefully and exquisitely, make a reason for it and cleanse it with the last strength left in you, and accordingly restore it.
And therefore, if it is healed, good it is; and otherwise, you should know that this corruption is in the deep and distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus there is nothing for you to do but to leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract it, then you should attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then you should make the extraction of all those, and leave no cause for any reason with your strength.
But if you find any cause of the moistures which is contrary to your intention, and in its insight there is no fear or error, then you should insert those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones of your time, then pause over that wound which is causing the wound to fester, and leave it until that wound is in the environs of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inserted into your operation is constricted.
They have it, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in soap with oil, or wound submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green unguents, because when those ligaments putrefy, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a great bone like the bone of the hip or the coccyx or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then you should remove that with scissors only as far back as necessary until that blackness and corruption is removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
But if that which is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it and insert all into the location where the corruption has spread, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you approach one man in his own coccyx, so that you may pause over it and assist with your operation.
A young man of about thirty years old, who feels pain in his coccyx, and the parts inside are swollen on the material inside the body until the material reaches the coccyx, and it is a matter of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
And thus, the time was extended by the mistake of doctors until the apostema was hubert, and there was a flow of many materials from it, and its cure was accordingly paused until the hip was fistulated, and it made way for many orifices which all poured out putridity and the humors of the body.
And thus, many doctors were treating it for about two years, and they did not have knowledge in medicine, only in the art, until you were called.
And I saw the hip of that man and the materials that were flowing from it through many orifices; and already the body of that man was totally stunted and his color was citrine.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And accordingly, I examined all the orifices and found those that reached their respective parts of the hip.
And then I cut and inserted myself into one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted, and already it was rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and a part of the hip had already been corrupted to the extent that it had penetrated into the pelvis.
And then I saw what was revealed and prepared for me from the discovered bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone, but rather that corruption which had consumed and destroyed, and I had already begun to desecrate.
And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And accordingly, I iterated and discovered again on the bone subsequently to the initial discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And I saw that what appeared to me from that corruption was not sufficient for the cure and restoration of it, and accordingly, I was forced to make the operation and restore it, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered again on the other side and did not cease to insert into the small bone little by little, particularly, and forced the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted around a palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly, I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And there is no need for iteration in the operation of it and section of it, except by the disposition of the friar of it and by the paucity of tolerance of it and fear of death, because to it occurs at all hours due to superfluous evacuation syncopal bad.
And thus, the healing is by total healing, and nothing remains in place of bone hard flesh; and good disposition has been made for it within its own body, and the virtue of it returns; and it is converted into its own dispositions, and does not make contrariety in walking or harm to any cause.
But if it is bone prominent in the body already traumatized, then you must cut that according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it; and pause that ligament of coarse wool more than the first ligament; and accordingly, bind that over the flesh that remains on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh on the place which you want to cut off so that the cut does not harm the flesh.
And pause the knife or table over the bone decently, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to cut off the corrupt flesh.
And it is necessary that the cutting be done over the corrupt area little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and you are forced to cut off another part.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is more likely that one part continues into another, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it; then you will uncover all parts of the flesh entirely; and accordingly, pause your knife, and accordingly, cut off that from the first part where the corruption is until the cutting of the other part is continued.
And be the cutting according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and cut off the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but by nature.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the arm or leg, it is quite difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in which manner it appears to you, and cut into that, and cleanse that according to any disposition that is possible for you, and with each case, rectify what is contrary to you, when it does not affect veins or nerves.
And you should know what instruments are used and the saws to cut into these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness, subtlety, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare for all kinds of operations and instruments suitable for that operation.
And you should know that this operation means to you about the kind of instrument which you need; when with you is great study and long and deep knowledge of the manners of this art, and witness to the mannerisms of diseases, for then you already have them for yourself, what is convenient to all instruments for every disease.
And I shall present to you the list of instruments which will pause with you as simple ones, with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others. Forma of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another great saw:
Form of Ray: So the head of this saw is like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points are shaped like those of an astelfigi.
And it is not suitable to use this saw except when the heads of the joints are confricated (i.e., crushed or broken) and are corrupted, or if there is a large and wide mouth.
Form of the smaller razor:
Form of the large razor:
Form of another saw decently made: Form of it:
Form of the razor with concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another curved-edge razor:
Form of a small razor resembling a probe:
Form of another smaller instrument used to cut:
Form of another instrument resembling a saw:
Form of a saw that is suitable for cutting through bones:
And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp edge.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, it seems that all the causes we have discussed regarding razors, instruments, and saws are applicable to this instrument as well.
And it is used for cutting into extremities and cutting through bones.
The extremities can be affected either by an internal cause or an external cause, or as you will medicate that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not conform, sometimes the corruption goes to the member which is not struck by any cause. Then it is necessary for you to cut into that member until the harm caused by the corruption reaches a certain point, so that the sick person escapes from death or malice which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens is when the member becomes black until it is cut and burned, or if you can bring the blackness closer so that the burning goes into that member that is like it and takes over the whole body; and thus you must take account of this.
And similarly, if it is a cause of corruption due to the sting of certain venomous causes such as the scorpion of the sea or the viper or the ratel and similar ones.
And if the corruption or sting is in the tip of the finger, then you must cut off the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you must cut off that of the wrist, and not give space to the corruption so that it does not take hold in the armpit of the arm.
And if it reaches the arm, then you must cut off the arm at the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption passes and spreads around the shoulder joint, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this one in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you must cut off that at one of the joints.
And if it takes hold at the ankle of the foot, then you must cut off the entire foot. But if it penetrates into the leg, then you must cut off the thigh at the junction of the leg.
And if corruption has already prevailed over the leg, then in that case there is no remedy, but only dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
And the method of cutting off the limb or sawing it is that you strengthen one ligament at the part farthest from where you want to cut, and stretch another ligament over the location; and extend one minister's ligament to the parts behind, and extend the other minister's ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, leaving a gap about as wide as the thickness of a spatula, so that all the flesh is revealed; and then it is cut or sawed.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over all the parts so that the location is not touched, and that the wound comes to the patient adjusted and cauterized.
But if bleeding occurs during the operation, then you must cauterize the location calmly, or pause for a moment and use some binding powders to staunch the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then apply a ligature to the wounded limb at a convenient point, and cure that until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that you attempt to heal a man whose toe is affected by this accident which we and you have recounted, which is when it becomes black in his foot with an inflammation that was assembled as if by the combustion of fire.
And that corruption began first in his toe and spread throughout the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for the possibility that pus would come out and the cure would go to the member with the vehemence of his pain and inflammation of it, and he cut off that foot at the junction, and it became healthy.
For a long time, that corruption had spread to the finger of his hand.
And then it came to me, and thus I perceived the surplus of that corruption above which was suspended over his hand with regard to the medicines, so that the purging of his body began; and no longer was the surplus reflected back, but instead it began to move towards another finger in his hand.
And he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do that, hoping instead for the reflection of that surplus back onto itself, but rather fearing the amputation of his hand, since the patient's vital force was already at a low ebb.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and reported to me that the man had prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it was healed.
And I have not narrated this story except to serve as an aid for those who seek to understand this disease, and to provide a signification by which it may be interpreted and acted upon.
The care of wounds and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some flesh and the space of the abscess is prolonged to form a collection of pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the location remains open like a vessel, with a covering that is like thin cloth, and there is no further corruption, and it does not penetrate into bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption enters into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure for this is that you cut out that covering entirely, as it is revolved, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, and make sure that it does not stick to the location due to its corruption.
But if you think that the covering will stick and that the corruption has not had its due consequence, and in the covering there has been a change of direction, then you cure that with poultice.
And so you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of the kind that gives off an odor, then apply poultice to that with Egyptian medicine which is made from oil, vinegar, and zingiber receiving equal parts, and be adjusted in a vessel, and be poured over the fire until the medicine becomes rough and turns into a substance like honey.
And then you take from it the water that is necessary and dissolve it with equal parts of water and honey; and apply poultice to that sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.
And then you extract that abscess; and make it so for as many days as is necessary until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is applied with ash water, when this medicine is not present; and it is that you take the ash of vines, and put it on top of water; and then mix it together and apply poultice to that with it until you are convinced that the sinus is closed.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then apply poultice to that with honey and water mixed with a small amount of zingiber shredded, and then apply poultice to that with vinegar and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in vinegar there is an excess of stiptic and drying properties.
And when you do this several times and are convinced that the sinus is now removed, then apply poultice to that with water that makes the skin appear in it.
And it is that you take from the divine dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic vinegar; or that you apply poultice to that with several medicines and other substances that have properties such as those which I have already written in the treatise on medicines.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the canula of the poultice, then you amplify that with a small iron tool bit by bit, and pause in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilic cloth until it is amplified.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you add the lips of it with a suture and leave it in such quantity that the poultice can be added to it.
And if the opening of that from which the arm flows is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest part of it so that the arm flows into it, because when the arm is constricted in the swelling of the sinus, the flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environs of the bone, then you should perforate the member with preparation for which the arm will flow slightly according to your apparel and that there be no reason in it for the arm to be retained.
But that which is on the opening of the sinus, which remains in all its hour because it is adjusted to the arm. And so that you can know if what comes out from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And at this point you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is dropped on the opening of the sinus already sticking or approaching adhesion, then dry it out with a cloth or a small tool on the third day, and when you remove the dressing, then change the cloth for another and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinus there is too little space for a subtle virus to be present, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it is approaching, because some people in whom tardy generation of flesh occurs in their wounds, and others are in those in which the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus it takes many days for an undigested arm to be present, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause prolonged, then you adjust in exsiccation of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they are dried out like enguent dyafinicon, when there is an excessive addition of zegi.
And the most later of all is that which is cured, that you take from dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it to the wound with an old equal substance, and then confirm that on it, and use that.
And it seems so in that action, when there is no brac, dyafinicon, and honey when it is mixed into being thickened, and use it; or that you take myrrh and aloen and onions, and grind everything together and powderize it over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it up with water on cloth and stretch it over the sinus; and line it up with the honey which has been mixed into being thickened, and powderize it on cloth and stretch it.
And some times it is administered at the aristological long and razed of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them together and powderize them over the honey which has been recounted; and husk it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and already inquiry is made in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with fistular treatment, just as above is said.
Of the cure of panarici, and unguis attritae, and incision of finger added, and section.
Panarici is an abscess that leaves behind the nail of the toe or finger, and spreads quickly to other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it becomes apostematized with caution, or it becomes corrupted, and throws forth brackish water within which corrodes the root of the nail, and quickly corrupts that entirely, and quickly pervades its corruption to the bone, and makes a fetid odor, and causes the extremity of the finger to become gangrenous.
And therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you inscribe with iron all the superfluitat that remains of the nail and appropriate cauterize the wound with water, for cauterization is most helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the adductions of the nail are already compressing the flesh to the parts outside, and begin to prick and lead it away from that place, then you must pause a fine ray below the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up and inscribe it into the flesh with ease, and pause over what remains of the flesh of the medicines combining corrosive substances until it is all removed; and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you must inscribe the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing that is corrupted in the bone.
And if at times the corrosion and corruption go into the digit, then you must inscribe it in one of the joints according to the premonition of its reminiscence, and appropriate cure that until it is healed.
But if the nail is inflamed with percussion or attrition, and inflames in that place with a vehement pain, then you must first fleubotomize the malady, and then secate the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful not to allow the section to penetrate into the flesh that is left behind the nail, for you would make the malady cause a vehement pain, and thus cause unnecessary birth of superfluous flesh in that place; and then cure that place with what relieves pain.
But it is said that this adjustment is natural in many men, and for many is all flesh, or for many is in the bones, or for many is in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or is the birthplace of them in certain joints of the fingers. But that which is born in certain joints of the finger does not become mad, and that which is born in the junctures is very much maddened.
And from those who are born of flesh, the section is easy, and it is that you must inscribe the root with a sharp spatula.
But from those who are born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the abscess of it.
But in that which is born of the digit, thou must first cut off the joints, and then inscribe with a round instrument into the bone, and afterwards saw with one of those saws suitable for this, and then cure that until it is healed.
But the consolidation that occurs in the fingers between their joints or due to the nativity of the human being who is born with it, or due to the consolidation of a wound or due to combustion by fire, or for similar reasons, therefore you must cut away that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between their folds with a little oil rose for not being consolidated lightly, and separate those, or pause between those one thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is needed.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you must cut away that consolidation according to what is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
Of the inscription of vice, there are several.
Vices are varicas, and so are veins enveloped in thick, full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come forth from the members of the body, and the most common occurrence of theirs is in the hips, and especially in the hips of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body with black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the Basilic vein.
But the cure of theirs with iron is according to two methods: one is that you inscribe and attract that black blood, and the other method is that you elevate the vein and extract all.
The section of this is according to this method: first, take the hip with cold water and make it moist until the thick blood is resolved, which is turbid from the hip, and then strengthen the hip of the patient at the highest point of the coccyx, and above that, above the denounment, with a bandage, and then cut off the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide section, and then raise the black blood by the tieua of the partition below the hip, from top to bottom, until the desired quantity of blood is removed, which takes away the virtue of the patient.
And then lie down, and command to him that he abstain from foods that generate black cholera.
And iterate the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed to the patient.
But the elevation of theirs is according to this method: you who raise the hip of the patient, if it is covered with moss (mots pels), and then put it in a bath and wrap the hip with cold water until it becomes red and the veins are filled; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, even without bath, until the member is warm.
And then cut the cord (codena) in the right side of the vein for a section in the long or end part of it, or in the lower part of it, you should make the hole (lo talo).
And then fill the cord (codena) with unguents and scrape off the vein from all parts until it appears to the sensation, and be aware of that which times that part often asks for darkness.
And thus, as you take away (cum evazeys) the cord (codena), and the white substance that is cord-like (quays sia corda).
And then you must put away that which is the way (le ray) so that it may be elevated and thrown away from the cord (codena), and suspend it with a hook (orp) like a lion.
And then you must make another section (seccio) near that section for three fingers (ditz), and then scrape off the cord (codena) from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
And then you must elevate that and inscribe it in the rear section of the talo (le talo), and then extract it and elevate it until it is emerged through the second section, and then extract it from the section above.
And then do this until you extract it from the highest or uppermost section of all the sections, until everything is emerged; and then inscribe it.
And if it does not obey your order to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and bind it (ligua aquela) and extract it, or insert below it the way and revolve your hand around the entire area until it is gone. And be careful that it is not torn (inscidida); for if it is broken, it will become difficult for you to elevate that part and it will come back upon the patient as a nuisance.
And when all that has been removed (tota) is fully gone, then pause over the place of the wound, submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted (tortuositat) without a normal curvature, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must cut across that part of tortuosity of yours and at the places where there is curvature, and then suspend it with unguents until you elevate it all.
And beware that your incision (seccio) does not cut into the vein and does not injure it, for then it would be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise caution in that.
The shape of the incision that is made with the blood:
It is not like that of a hook or scissors, nor has it an acute extremity so as to injure the vein; but rather it has a thick and flexible lion-like shape, because if it were too subtle, it would cut into the vein due to its subtlety; and it has in excess a thickness similar to what we have said.
The extraction of the saphenous vein.
This vein is generated in the hips (cambas) in cold lands, as Al-Ategi said in the land of Arabs and in dry lands with little moisture and in those where there is no grass nor river.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body beyond the hips.
And its generation is from putrefaction that remains after the cord (codena) as well as venom poured out from the body of serpents, worms, and scorpions, and worms generated between the cord and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the coming of it is when this vein in the hip becomes inflamed with great fervor; and at that place, vesicles form; and then the vein begins to emerge from that location where it appears as if a plant has taken root.
And then, when the extremity appears from him, you must wrap around it a leaden cloth of which one ounce weighs two drams, and anoint it and let the lead hang from the hip.
And whenever you find some cause at the outer parts (partidas), wrap it in lead and bind it. And if the part is prolonged (mot es prolonguat), you must incise one part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut into that which has a root (de razit) until it is fully gone, for if you cut into it, it will be contracted and enter into the flesh and cause apostema and burning in that place and bad ulceration.
Therefore, it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it little by little, until it is fully removed from the body and there is no remaining cause in the body.
And from this vein, some men have been extracted who are in its length of 20 palms and I have already seen one who was 30 palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication (hora de la sua medicacio), then you must introduce the ray into the track of it and pierce that part with a long track through the body, until all that which is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that part by the cure of apostemas.
And this vein sometimes has many branches (motz ramps), and especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out with many orifices (orrificis), and is issued from each orifice a branch.
And therefore, cure that part just like we have said in the division and also as has been said above.
On the removal of worms generated under the skin and it is called Bovine Ailment.
This illness is called in some lands the Bovine Ailment because many times it appears to be related to oxen and there is a worm that is born between the cord (codena) and the flesh, which goes throughout the body rising and falling, and is felt by the sensation of the own affection for limb to limb until it breaks the cord and comes out.
And the generation of this worm is due to putrefaction (putrefaccio) of certain humors, just like it happens with worms and serpents and lizards and scorpions in the womb.
And it is feared for the malice of this worm, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it is very strong in it and goes into it and destroys it, and that ends many times.
And therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not proceed if you do not have the patient's consent and appearance of the wound (sentiment), and thus it is necessary to stretch what is above it and what is left of it with gentle constriction, and then bind over it and extract that.
And if it is buried in the flesh and you do not remove it, then you must pause the cauterizing iron with fire on the location until it dies, and the greatest fear that is feared is the corruption of the surrounding area which corrupts the location just as we have said.
And if you find that the worm has reached the head near the brain, then strengthen the scalp with a strong stricture, and then bind over it, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to use the purification of their body with medicines evacuating bad humors, and beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On the removal of worms from the skin (sectione super aegritudinem nafir).
This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and is spread from member to member.
And you already know it, as I have recommended it to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein at the end of the arm, and after being there for an hour, I saw that swelling go away just like worms rise up to this place, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it flows from place to place.
And then I went back to the pain in that place and fixed myself into the muscle, and there stayed for an hour.
And then I corrected it in another direction until I reached the other arm.
And then I told myself that it was revolving itself around the entire body according to what you saw; and it was too marvelous the transformation of it and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my own flesh according to that manner; however, I have seen many others which also suffer from being transformed from member to member. But I did not see it in the same way with my own flesh as I saw it in the woman.
And I didn't think it was this way, but rather it is because the woman was old, with few seconds and veins uncovered, and in this appearance, that ventosity became perceptible.
And it is necessary that this condition does not appear according to this retrograde course in those who are delicacies and have humid hearts with veins hardened.
And when you want the cure of that, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you what is happening at the top as we have said, but you must strengthen over that and leave it slightly open and dry over that until that ventosity is blocked, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not treat it with the right pulse, then you must cure that with excitement of the chest and with what expels ventosity, and charm those with foul pills and with pills of serape and similar ones.
Of the removal of thorns.
Thorns are diversified according to species, and according to the locations of the body where they grow, because their diversity is that some have great points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and those with tongues; and those with stars.
And among the signs of the servant is when it caters in the sageta, and trespasses the bone, and is situated above the cyphac which is on the brain, because accident occurs due to soda vehement, scotomia, vertigo, and roar in the ears, and inflammation and roar of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of gall, and it is very much destroyed the word and is ruined the voice, and there is situated above the wound a humid white substance similar to powder, and there is an appearance of water like the flesh.
And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then it is necessary that you abstain from the cure and extraction of the thorn, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the thorn when it caters in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if something has been placed there in a hard cause, and not a soft one; and very soon the movement of the thorn is like the movement of the pulse, and flows from the wound black blood, and there is a feeling of coldness in the extremities, and a shivering sensation, and fainting; and therefore know that death is descending upon you completely.
And the signs when the thorn has pierced the lung are that blood foam comes from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and the spirit breathes heavily, and asks for fresh air.
And if the thorn pierces the membrane which is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small ribs, and it makes a great loud noise with violent pain and sighing, and none of the members of the muscles can be moved.
And if the thorn pierces the stomach, then very soon there will be some undigested food coming out of the wound.
And if the thorn pierces the belly and is stuck there, then some gap or tear in the wound, or the membrane or bladder which is broken, and there is no hope for the cure of the extraction of the thorn.
And if the thorn pierces the bladder and is voided outside as urine, and processes some cause to the parts outside, and very soon there is pain on the patient, then you should know that it is mortal.
But other members such as the face, neck, and groin, and the shoulders and assistants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the furcula, and the coccyx, and the hip and its likenesses to the members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the thorn does not touch a vein or artery and is not a venomous thorn.
And I tell you this, that I have seen the being of these thorns, and for what it signifies for the cure of this illness.
The cause is that when the thorn pierces in the lacrimal of the eye socket in the root of the nose, and I extract it from the other side, leaving the gray matter of the ear behind, and he recovers, and does not suffer any harm to the eye.
And I extracted another thorn from a Jew, which had pierced him in the gray matter of his eye socket, leaving behind the eyelid plus further, and the thorn was already hidden and not visible except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his fist, and it was a great thorn of the sharp thorns of the Turks, like a lion's claw without ears.
And the Jew sat, and did not suffer any harm in his eye.
And I extracted another thorn from a Christian man, which was lodged in the groin area, and it was an Arab thorn, and it had ears; and then I incised above that one between two guides, and it was already submerged in his groin; and then I carefully extracted it, and he is now healed, the Christian.
And I extracted another thorn from a man, which was lodged in his stomach, and thought that he would die because of it; and therefore, since more than 30 days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised above the thorn and operated on it, and he is now healed, and not affected by the harm.
And I saw a man in whom a thorn had pierced the spine of his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and after almost seven years, the thorn came out at the root of the backbone.
And I saw a woman in whom a thorn had pierced her stomach, and the wound was consolidated on the inside of her, and it had not changed in her condition for many years, and the woman did not experience any harm or difficulty with any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom a thorn had pierced his face and the wound was consolidated and the thorn remained, not causing any great pain or resembling those.
And I extracted the thorn from the king's nose, which was lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side by a small amount, and the whole thorn was hidden.
And I was summoned for the treatment of him within three days after the thorn entered.
And then I examined the wound of the thorn very carefully; and then I inquired about it with subtle attempts, and did not feel any pain; but he felt a pricking sensation behind his right earlobe, and then I suspected that this prick was from the extremity of the thorn.
And I applied the ointment to the place where it is virtuous for attracting and digestion, believing that the place is inflamed because of the thorn's presence, and that it needs to be cleansed over that area.
And there was no significant accident in the place where the thorn had managed to reach that location; and I continued to apply the ointment on him for many days, and there was no accident; and the wound consolidated in the meantime, and the patient's malady from the exit of his nose remained for several days until one day he felt the thorn inside his nose and recognized it again.
And then I applied to the wound acute corrosive medicine for many days until it was fully open, and with the attempt, I carefully extracted that extremity of the thorn which adhered to his fist.
And then I adjusted in the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visible to me as the extremity of the thorn, and passed on to something else with this space of time within four months.
And then as the wound became amplified, and I had the possibility to enter it with forceps, and remain there, and not obey any orders, but rather, I continued to subtilize and engineer on that spot using the methods of engineering, until one day on that spot using the methods of engineers, taking him with descending forceps, according to the shape of those in the end of the capital, within which I extracted it; and then restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed by whole health, and there is no damage to him in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some thorns because it is necessary that you pause here and consider the rule and significance of what has been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or free speech.
And the artisans know well how to compare a little with much, and on what is present with what is absent; and they find new operation and new instruments that are necessary for the descent of external causes from art when accidents occur.
And therefore, I say that thorns are not expelled from the members in which they are stuck, except according to two ways: or by attraction of the place where they entered; or by contrary motion of the other part.
And that which is expelled by the place where it entered, or is a thorn proceeding from a fleshly location, and is attracted and expelled.
And if it does not obey the sign of the hour in which it was caught, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it becomes putrid, and the attraction to it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not obey your sign, then leave it for some days and iterate the attraction and motion every day, and it will be expelled.
And if it does not obey your sign after some days, then you should pierce the circuit of the thorn in that bone on all sides with a subtle tool until the location is amplified by the thorn, and then extract it.
And if the thorn is already hidden in the location of the flesh, and is hidden from feeling, then you should inquire into it with gentle attempt, and if you feel it, then attract it with some suitable instruments that are fitting for its attraction.
And if you cannot get to it on that side due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the preone, and here there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you should feel over the wound until it is amplified and it becomes possible to extract the thorn.
And if you have the means to obtain them at a suitable price, then you should deliver the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with all the skill that you can muster; and invent something over this, if you cannot obtain the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those until it complies.
And when you administer the extraction of the thorn in every location where it is, then you should use with twisting of your hand and forceps on all sides until it complies; and subtlety with subtle delicacy that the thorn is not broken and that it is made to fit your difficult attraction to it and its extraction.
And if you cannot do anything about that of your hour, then you should leave for some days until the parts that are in the circle of it become settled, and then iterate again when it is alleviated. But if there is contrary flow of blood to you, then you should administer the water that we have said in our chapter on cure.
And take care of your virtue of inscizio of vein or nerve or cord, and administer skill in every manner possible to the evasion of the thorn; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as you have recommended.
And therefore, that you may counteract the thorn in such a way that the malady is according to the figure according to which you are forced to cauterize the thorn in it, because it is more justifiable. But if this is not possible for you, then you should administer what is possible to you according to the figures.
But the thorns that are expelled by the contrary of the other part, or which already have proceeded some part to the parts outside, or make softness (gillibositat) at the extremity of the thorn due to the sensation of the part above the codena propdana and sometimes elevated; then you should see over it; and be the section according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and properly attract it, because it is made light for a sign.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the thread (lama) according to contrary motion until the thorn (sageta) presses into the bone, and amplify as far as possible, and properly extract that.
And if not, then leave that for some days, and properly iterate that until it is consumed.
And if the root of the thorn is in that place, then you should push it into place.
But if the root is cut and you must administer impulse, then you should introduce it into that place, even if it is deaf, using a hidden instrument so that it enters the concavity of it in the tail of the thorn and properly push it into place.
But if the thorn is concave, then you should push it into place with a strong instrument entering into that, because the thorn is alleviated by that.
But if the thorn is embedded, then you should cover all the flesh where it is located, if that is possible to you, and properly care for it with what is necessary.
And if the thorn (sageta) is stuck in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to see over it, then look over it and take care not to damage any veins or nerves, and extract it, and properly cover the wound if necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma of forceps by which are attracted thorns:
The extremities (ends) of which are like the beak of an owl, and are made as if they were a saw when they take hold on the thorn so that it does not let go.
And there are many species, great, few, and mid-sized, according to the quantity of greatness of the thorn and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
As if a ray of light that is alleviated the instrument of it in the concave thorn and is pushed into it.
Of phlebotomy on the veins:
The veins of phlebotomy, which are accustomed to being cut by phlebotomy... of which there are 16 on the head... which are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, as they say; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes which are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are to the throat; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and  these are the veins that are called algelic ; and there are two veins below the tongue. But there are 5 veins that are cut in the arms... because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it is located in the wild arm; and the people call it "the vein of the head", silent, and it is a mid-sized vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that the people "the vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein that is located in the domestic arm, and it is called "citillar", and common people call it "vein of the belly"; and the arm veins, and it is located on the forearm, and it is the one where phlebotomy is done, and it is the one that appears on the shoulder for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two branches in it.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of which is that which is located below the curvature of the tibia of the wild arm; and the second is saphena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic arm; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild arm; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The flow of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, antiques and migraines, saharitis and ulcerous sores on the head, old evils.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you recommend to yourself: that it should be clean the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient should be massaged on the occiput in the location where both veins meet with a wide cloth and good friction; bring the patient's neck tight with a bandage until the two veins appear at their locations near the ears in two spots under the cap; and then ask yourself if you feel the pulse of those with your own said, and if you do not sense it with your own said, here I will not try.
Take the lancet-cutting instrument, and it is that which is inserted, and take it into that location below the vein in the cord until the phlebotomy comes to the bone. And then lift your hand and take hold of the vein and cord at the parted parts above and cut into the vein with a cutting instrument. And make the length of the incision two digits or around that, and let blood flow out as much as you want.
And then take out the blood and leave it to be healed.
And now and previously in the beginning of this book, I have described the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arteries that are on the temples, the flow of bloodletting is for ancient and bad migraines, frequent obtalmia, and a body with acute effusions in the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrain the patient's neck tightly until the two veins appear by sensation and are demonstrated manifestly, and let your pulse be felt below the said tie; and then try again if it doesn't work.
And then lift the cord above the vein at the parted parts above, indicated by your pulse, and insert the bloodletting instrument below, and lift the vein up; and cut into it just like you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause your pulse on the vein for an hour, and then pause on that spot and pulp and strengthen that part above with strong constriction, and leave it to be healed.
And now it is preceded by the remembrance of theirs, and of those, and their incision, and attraction in the beginning of this book.
And thus the flow of bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is suitable for the bloodletting of the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face and ancient migraines, and rages, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting there is according to what you recommend to yourself; so it is that the patient tightens their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is its form:
Pause the point that is at the tip of the fossor above that vein and strike on it with a gentle or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with bloodletting late, but it does not need that the bloodletting be of acute extremity just like the other bloodlettings, but rather ahead of the lateral extremity, and bloodlet there according to the traverse, because the bone is propitious and strong enough to break through the bloodletting when it is subtle.
But the flow of the two veins that are on the lacrimals of two eyes for the scabs of the eyes due to rage and sebum in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient tightens their neck with a bandage, and then you stand on top of it.
And so the bloodletting is done according to the traverse at a length of a little bit with some bloodletting, because in that location there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is subtle, then the extremity of it is broken.
And then let the blood flow as much as you need it to, and pause on those spots, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
But the bloodletting of the nasal vein is related to acute fever and strong thirst, and to diseases of the face and ancient migraines and rages that occur on the face, and most especially when it is old.
And the quality of the bloodletting there is that the patient tightens their neck and you take your right hand and hold it to the patient's nose with your left hand, and take the bloodletting instrument subtle and long and place it in the middle location of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear by sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
It is necessary that you finish your hand with the bloodletting instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then tie it up for one night, because it is restored gradually.
But the flow of bloodletting from the two guides leads to constriction of the eyes and the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases and impurities and bad ulcers that are corroded like herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that the patient tightens each one in their neck with a bandage; and the artist sits on top of the patient's head, and the patient is seated on a stool.
And then let blood flow from the vein at length with an ample and small bloodletting, little by little; and then extract blood according to the quantity of time or according to what is needed, as it is required; and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the bandage and strengthen the two veins with a gentle pressure to ensure that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
And the flow of bloodletting from the Algerian veins, causes small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are on the nose and in the surrounding area.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that it makes the patient sit before you, and tighten their neck with a bandage, and then turn up the lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those small black veins; and therefore incise each for incision incident.
But if there is doubt left in you, and you do not know which one is the greatest of these, then you must understand to incise the most prominent one of those, and the most evident one.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
But the flow from the two veins below the tongue is suitable for bloodletting of the cephalic vein in cases of obstruction that are in the goiter, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that it follows the patient between your arms in front of the sun, and raises the tongue of him, and looks down at the tongue, from one side of the vein to the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
And then bleed each one (fleubotoma quascuna); and be careful that you don't finish your hand in bleeding those veins, because below those are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodletted in the cold are those in which bleeding is customary for all men, and the bloodletting of theirs is done according to two methods, either by placing the bloodletting instrument on the vein with a subtle inclination or on an olive branch; or cutting it off with a cutlery instrument and calling it "silence", and this is the form that is used:
So be it that the width of him is as much as times, and it corresponds to open the concave veins full of blood proceeding from apparent great thickness, and to those that contain thick blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser latitude and more subtle extremity, and it corresponds to bloodletting of fine veins that contain subtle citrine blood.
But the flow of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, for extracting the blood of diseases that are below the goiter and throat, and from this it clears the feet and belly.
And it is fitting for the bloodletting practitioner, when bloodletting that, to be careful with that and to have a preoccupation with that, because beneath him there is an artery, and if he erred and adjusted in the puncture of the bloodletting, he would incise that artery and cause bleeding, which is why it is necessary not to bloodlet that with the sharp instrument, but rather to cut with silence.
And if the basilic vein does not appear in a manifest manner, then you must leave it and move to another or seek out some branch of it; or bloodlet at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and cut it with the bloodletting instrument as we have said.
But if you want to do the bloodletting of him, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm that touches the location inside where you know the location of the hands, and place a sign on him with a notch; and tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave sectioning instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the percussion for some space from the location of the artery.
And when you tie, with the ligature, inflation in the location that you have marked with a notch, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if the blood flows in the bloodletting as if it were the milk of a child, and the blood is very subtle and red, then you know that it is from the artery; and when you see and pause your statement about that for a long time; and appropriately open your statement, and if the blood has been cut off, because many veins are cut off, then you tighten the arm and leave that.
And beware of the patient's excrement and be over-concerned with him and do not worry about it for a few days until he is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off and you are not present with medicine to that, then you must incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of him is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a scissor-like device made from fists, and open it up, and take one half and tighten it on the location of the vein with constriction and ligament and powder inside another day.
And if the blood is cut off, it is good; and otherwise, then cure that with what preceded it to the memory of the location where the powder-filled vessels have been cut off.
And the cutting off of the blood from him is difficult in many situations due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But from the jugular vein (de la vena fusca) bloodletting is a flow that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; therefore, because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the bloodletting practitioner to be over-concerned with that which lies beneath the skin, for beneath it there is a nerve; and accordingly, if he adjusts in the puncture of the bloodletting and finds the nerve, he will cause stupor in him, and it is difficult for him to recover, and even if he is not entirely healed, And this nerve often appears with sensation; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and does not show itself, then it is necessary for you to pause the bloodletting with the instrument of sharpness, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein in its length.
The flow of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts the diseases of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this way, if you want to make the bloodletting pierce with olive branch bloodletting or myrtle bloodletting; because it is the most saved of all veins, since there is no artery nor nerve below.
But I must advise you that often times the patient is inflamed in some men when it is not bloodletted in the first percussion, but not noted in such a way.
The first one is of the kind that you should know that bloodletting is not administered except in the conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution against the event of diseases; and that the bloodletting is done on one of the three veins that are in the arm, namely cephalic, jugular, and basilic; and that the bloodletting is done at the beginning of spring, after a light meal, in the morning, and in autumn, before a heavy meal, and in winter, just before eating, when signs of repletion appear.
And the bloodletting should be done three days or at the first opportunity after the sun has passed three hours.
But bloodletting that is administered is done when it is convenient and necessary for the patient, whether it be in the morning or afternoon, at any hour and at all times.
And it is necessary that children under 14 years old should not be bloodletted, and women should not be bloodletted unless they are past the fourth month of pregnancy up to seven months, and elderly people should not be bloodletted if they have passed 60 years old.
And whoever wants to be bloodletted by some means or other, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before the bloodletting with a leon's clister, if in those there is a notable fleshy fold, so that the veins do not fill up with superfluous substances during the bloodletting of the bowels, which are pure and do not harm the main limbs.
And one should not be bloodletted while having nausea and vomiting, or if one has a bad habit of drinking too much wine, nor after getting drunk, unless the above-mentioned symptoms have been purged from their body. Nor should one be bloodletted when suffering from dropsy or other water-based illnesses. Instead, one should wait until the following symptoms have passed: colic pain, vomiting, and stomach upset, as well as multiple bowel movements, labor pains, and excessive exercise, all of which dissolve the virtues of the body or animal.
And carefully consider in subtle inquiry of vapors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for that.
And enter into bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise for some exercise so that the blood may be subtle.
And pause the bloodletting at that point in the day, around the hour of tercia, as we have said.
And force yourself to keep the point of that day free from all animal evils, as is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, just like excessive labor and unnecessary pain, and similar things.
And make sure that your chamber is filled with the causes of which the custom of men uses aromatics and odors, and balms, and things similar to these, according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the bloodletting practitioner on a couch that is higher than the one that should be used for bloodletting.
And gently take out the patient's arm, and wipe it with their own hand or the bloodletting practitioner's two or three times; and then tighten the ligature around the cord and wrap it twice.
And the constriction should be moderate, because if the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is with superfluous substance, hours prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with mollification, and hours prohibit the body's blood from flowing.
And carefully observe the constriction, for it is necessary that the one who should be bloodletted wipe his own hands between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the sense.
And let the bloodletting practitioner put a little bit of old oil on their own finger; and pause their right hand index finger over that vein, leaving the place where you want the bloodletting to take place, so that the vein will flow a little, and the pulsation will be settled when you find the one that is like a cord fleeing from the bloodletting, and those are the ones that are full of windiness; and when you pause the bloodletting on that one, it will be contracted and then released, and the bloodletting practitioner will become confused; and the bloodletting will not fill the vein, and if it does, that one is blocked.
And therefore, it is necessary that the bloodletting practitioner be fixed and solicited in all these causes.
And thus, pause the bloodletting, but if the vein is swollen in one place, it is better to; and if not, try another place a little way from that location, or over the festive area, if the location is not exhausted.
And if the location is exhausted or the patient becomes feverish, it is better to leave them alone for a day or two and not tighten the ligature, because too much tension will attract another apostema, nor should they enter the bath.
And thus, repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the bleeding is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not yield the amount of blood you want, then you should repeat the bloodletting in that same spot according to rectitude and adjust the pressure a little, and do so with a festive atmosphere before the location becomes exhausted, because the location becomes exhausted in many men due to too little bleeding.
But if sometimes that place is exhausted, then do not repeat the bloodletting there, because it does not excuse any cause; and pause on another part of the vein of oil, because it soothes the body's blood. And it is better in this place that oil and the other oils are used.
And similarly, administer the vein of oil in all bloodletting procedures where one is prohibited from cutting into the body's natural flow of blood, and do so with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those locations, because the blood is subtle and revolts when it is thick.
And if in the location of bloodletting a great apostema is generated, because many times it happens, and especially to him who has not been bled since that vein, or when there is little bleeding in the vein, then you should cover it, and pause on that location, and soak it in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten that for an hour, until it dissolves.
And it is necessary to do so in accordance with the natural flow of blood from that vein, either by itself or in conjunction with another vein.
And if it remains in the same location for some days with a certain darkness or greenish tint, do not notice this; and if you wish, pause on that location with a mixture of aloen and dissolved mirra, or with a mixture of mint juice, calament, or something similar.
And many times accidents occur, such as apostemas and eminences, due to bloodletting from the basilica.
And so pause your hand over that place, and if you find moisture there, then apply compression to that place with your compressive force, and since that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore, be careful not to pause on that place with any of the causes we have discussed, for it may flow forth from the artery with great force.
And apply plaster to that place in which it is stiptic, so that the location may be hardened, and take care of it with another treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract the blood from every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears on top of the blood, as seen by the appearance.
For if the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then you should let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, then let it flow until the sharpness is gone.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong and has need of bloodletting in a single instance, that the bloodletting procedure be amplified in the vein and the bleeding be slow.
And for the one who is frail, do the opposite of what I have said, and it is necessary to extract that blood in frequent intervals, and make sure the cut is narrow.
And the best way to administer bloodletting from a vein is through a transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it is more commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
And if there is a habit of syncope preceding, it is necessary to perform bloodletting, and you should care for that person beforehand by infusing them with a small amount of wine mixed with milgranas or oxymel, lightly scalded; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
And if there is a tendency towards inflammation of the completion, then take care beforehand to infuse into the blood vessel with a mixture of myrrh or aromatic oil made from mel, flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar substances, or with an aromatic oil that has a strong odor.
And if syncopal episodes occur, it is necessary to perform bloodletting, and it is the cause of a great deal of blood loss, then take care beforehand by drinking water from the flesh of cattle and aromatic oil with a strong and subtle scent; and use aromaticity with some caution, and make sure that the patient's feet are in contact with that.
And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope due to evacuation.
And whoever wants to open their arm and dissolve their blood according to the second stage, should consider that for which bloodletting is done in order to evacuate, and the virtue of which is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as it is according to the quantity of the virtue in continuous days.
But whoever wants to open their arm and release their blood according to the first stage, and their body is strong, then do it about 7 hours or 9 after the first bloodletting.
But whoever wants to attract the blood from their body to the opposite side of the descent where it declines, should be done on the second day or third.
But that body in which there is a great deal of blood already scalded and sharp, and it makes the fever rise, needs to be let out with one stroke and a large quantity of blood should be taken away, and the attention should be amplified until syncope occurs; more so if you have kept all the conditions of bloodletting, and you should pause your hand over the pulse of the body from which the blood is being taken, in order to prevent death instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the bloodletting operator is ignorant and negligent.
And it's not right when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood according to the second stage, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it's difficult to extract the blood, that you press strongly on it and bend it slightly outward, because this is too bad.
They let it go until it is bloodletting secondarily; or they stop there with the acidity of the bloodletting that is coagulated in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that with tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with a light compression until the blood is outside.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and don't touch it until the inflammation is calmed down.
And if necessity requires you to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then you should mark that spot or on another arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is bloodletting in the place of the fusca or basilica when not obstructed or hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the pulse becomes inflamed and the vein appears manifestly.
And it should be strong on that spot where the vein is narrow and has a slight constriction; and it should be bloodletting according to the transverse small, not laterally nor longitudinally.
And it should be attention wide and your bloodletting with which you bloodlet that spot on the junction of the hand, a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and instead the body's blood is paused in cold water in winter.
And the bloodletting from this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has no pulsating vein nor nerve.
And the bloodletting from the sap vein of the right hand is related to liver diseases.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that you strengthen your hand with or without a bandage, more than you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly demonstrated at the moment; and then apply bloodletting transversally; and if incisions are made on all sides, do not neglect this in any way.
And be careful not to leave your hand exposed after bloodletting, because then the nerves of the fingers would be stripped of skin.
And immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse the hand in cold water, the blood will clot at the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated too quickly; similarly, you should do in all ways straight.
But the recommendation of bloodletting from that vein on the left hand is that it is related to liver diseases.
And do similarly in bloodletting from there just as you have done in the other.
And the recommendation of the vena sephena bloodletting is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, just as it is for diseases of the thigh, and for retention of menses, and for diseases of the throat and ulcerous sores of old knees and hips, and for their likenesses to those diseases.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient inserts their foot into cold water and makes a pressure on it until the veins appear; and then applies pressure over the junction of the foot and the ankle bone; and the location of the vein appears to be deviated from the usual path, and from there it ramifies in the face of the foot with many branches.
And therefore bloodletting should be done on the most prominent branch below the hip bone, since it is better and safer.
And if you are bloodletting in the face of the foot, then you should beware of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your bloodletting with which you are bleeding through the transverse incision, as if you were going to cut into it.
And thus the bloodletting is useless.
But if it is prohibited to let the blood flow; then you should insert the foot of that into cold water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the bloodletting practitioner is wrong in the first attempt, then you should repeat the bloodletting procedure a little, because the location is too difficult; and do not fear for evil, but beware of the nerves just as we have said.
And similarly, make the same incision on the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, the location is just as we have said, namely below the hip bone at the level of the gluteal fold.
And the recommendation of bloodletting from there is for the hip when it is necessary to stop bleeding.
And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient should enter into a bath, and hasten and strengthen the skin of the limb from the lateral side to the medial side above the ankle bone, and then make a thin bandage around it, so that nothing appears except through that.
And therefore, when it appears, then you should bloodlet that vein according to each individual's ability and according to the transverse direction, and it is better; or make an incision on that side or separate that part by sectioning it, since the location is difficult.
And it is in a few men who are moderately affected; and if you find that one, and there is no appearance of the feeling of all, then bloodlet on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the two sides of the foot below the auricular and anular bones.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood run as much as you like.
And approach closely the stricture and pause over the location of the bloodletting, cutting and strengthening the location, so that it becomes slightly healthy.
Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas are from corns, or from ears, or from veins.
And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is through scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification.
And this ventilation without scarification is done according to two methods, because it can be with fire or without fire.
And the ventozas that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are 14 locations on the body, among which one place where ventozas are paused is the alnocrati, which is the rear part of the head; and the middle location between the two parts of the neck; and ventozas below the mandible plus below the mouth; and ventozas with two spatulas; and ventozas with alohoster, which is above the end of the coccyx; and ventozas with two fociels, which are on two brasses; and ventozas with two cavilhas; and ventozas with two cuoyssas.
And ventilation does not extract the blood, but rather releases it from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not cure the disease through those means, just as is done by bloodletting; nor does it matter whether ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion, until the entire body is evacuated.
But if necessity demands it, provoke ventilation for illness or continued administration, administer that in the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time.
And therefore, when it happens in some of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be performed more than two or three hours after sunrise.
And the recommendation for ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity in the head and goes down to the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventozas is in the location of bloodletting of the cephalic.
And it is not allowed that one uses this method on someone who has a complexion of phlegm or in whom is catarrh, for it gives them great harm.
And therefore, one should not use this method on the elderly, and in those whose heads are afflicted with cold diseases.
But to those who are continuing on that [path] is made forgetfulness; and therefore it is necessary that you command the ventozador to pause his hand a little before the ventosa at the partitions, in order to fear the generation of forgetfulness.
But the ventozacio of alkohel is in the location of bloodletting of the vena fusca and basilica: and therefore confers on asthma, constriction of the lungs, rupture of the lung's membrane, and to the coughing, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the alkohel ventozas be a little filled, because if it is paused too long, it will generate weakness in the body and stomach.
And the ventozacio of alhagdahan confers on accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, emigration, preoccupation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is located in the location of bloodletting of the basilica.
And it is necessary that you command the bloodletter to not press his hand with scarification so that he does not cut the artery and cause flows of blood.
And ventozacio on the mento confers on alcola in the mouth, and corruption of the gingiva, and likenesses to their own diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the location of bloodletting of aliheric that is on both lips.
But the ventozacio that is done on the two spatulas confers on caphatan, which is made by repletion of warmth.
And the ventozacio of the two parts behind the foci confers on justly the bloodletting of three veins, that is, the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because that draws out the blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins that are attached to the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the bloodletter not to proceed too quickly with scarification, because the location is stripped of flesh and leaves him only nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventozas on which it is ventozated over alshosses and confers on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on ulcers that are later.
And it is necessary that you command the bloodletter to make a great ventozas, and one of earth, because the location requires strong section; and let there be gentle and subtle ventozas, and let it be scarified with scarification.
But the ventozas of the cambas are manifested through minuicio, because they attract the blood from all over the body, and confer on old pains in the kidneys and bladder, and provoke menstruation, and confer on bothor and ademil; and they stand in the location of bloodletting of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
However, they are so debilitating that they make accidents of syncope occur in many men.
And the ventozas alahorcoben have a justness that is proportional to the justness of the ventozas of two cambas.
And the quality of the position of the ventozas is that it pauses the ventoza at the beginning, and sucks up by early succussion, and does not prolong the position of the ventozas, but pauses those slightly, and remains those quietly, and let the humors come to the place by natural arrival. And do not cease until you see the location already redden and swell, and the rigor of the blood appears.
And after that, scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.
Because that person who has tender flesh and few pores, you should only scarify it once and not again, so that the location is not ulcerated.
And command the bloodletter to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and then apply the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thickened, then afterwards you should scarify twice, because in the first scarification, the way of subtlety to the blood and to its satiation is opened up. But in the second [scarification], you should proceed with the acquired scrutiny and extraction of the thickened blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be done so that the final result is achieved.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small quantities, it is enough for us with one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then afterwards you should scarify again.
And the term of scarification is the depth of the incision, not just.
And if the scar is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites of the ventosas be anointed with lenitive, apertive, and resolutive ointments; if it is in the summer, thus it should be done as with olive oil or violet oil or almond oil or sesame oil; and if it is in the winter, afterwards you should use winter ointments such as narcissus oil or lily oil or chamomile oil or blood oil and those similar to them.
And if the superfluity is great, then afterwards you should use oil that is amaranthine, or oil of balsamita, or olive oil, or anise oil and those similar to them.
But if the bloodletter is of large pores and tender flesh, then afterwards it is necessary to prohibit oil, and it is necessary that those sites of ventozas where the ventozacio is closest be washed with cold water or icy water from a saltpeter or with water of coja, or with water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
And that one whose blood is of great humidity, washes his ventozas with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And that one whose superfluities are great, washes his ventozas with antiseptic vinegar or with water of sansuc (which is majorana), or with the decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And it is necessary that the ventozation be done before dawn; having to administer it about an hour or two before dawn, and it is necessary that he sleep near the ventozation.
What is it that should be regulated so that the windpipe may be opened and the blood let out before the bleeding?
And thus consider at the beginning: afterwards, if the bloodletter or one who is to be fleubotomized is choleric and vents upon him with sharp blood and inflammation, then it is necessary that he take cooling causes, such as milgranas acetosas, endivia in vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and similar to those.
And pause from their foods as well as pulse, and meat of hens serving, and foods cooked with herbs, and similar to those.
And of that one whose complexion is fresh, it is necessary that he take in drink essence of almiva or essence of alsecanabin of sesame seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant myrrh between veal and Christmas; and that it be commended to him that he uses moderation in drinking and eating, and pause the foods of his pulse and canabir and pigeons and small hens and doves.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventozation and fleubotomia, drink be more abundant than food.
And it is necessary that it be given in drink to certain people at some hours tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musc, as it is muscadada, or alcelita before ventozation or before fleubotomia or nearby, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood be subtilized; and it is not necessary that they take those scaldings.
But the ventozas that are to be done by scarification should be ventozas that are paused on the liver, and over the gallbladder and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and at the tip of the large intestine, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those [places] but attraction of blood from the member, just as pause a ventosa on the nipple in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that to dissolve ventosity fresh viscous from the member, just as pause over the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and scalds it and relieves the pain which resolves ventosity.
And it is paused over the tonsils when they are obstructed or swollen, because by virtue of attraction it forcefully opens up obstruction and eradicates swelling from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is paused over the liver and gallbladder to dissolve ventosity in those who are enclosed.
And these ventozas are administered with suction alone, and sometimes with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in illnesses of the gallbladder.
And that is why the ventoza should be filled and be made greater, either with hot water or with water in which certain herbs are steeped to suitable proportions.
The form of ventoza administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two digits, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be half a palm; and it should be in the left side, at the location where it is in the circuit, half of that, the hole being small according to the amount that enters through an agulha.
It should be made of earthenware or citrine, with large margins, lion, equal, and terse, in order that it may not lead the member to deviate from its position on it.
And it should have in the middle a cross-shaped handle of earthenware or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
And this ventoza is much larger than the one we have described before; and the small size of that one, according to the diseases and condition of the person who uses it.
And the ventosas of the old and exhausted are different from those of the young and strong.
And the quality of placing this ventoza with fire on the member is that it extends the ember with good fuel decently before a small candle made of wax, and places it on the middle of the cross-shaped handle in the middle location of the ventoza, so that the fire is lit around the part left over, so that the patient's body is not burned.
And it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the said should be on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have the ventozas and do not need to use the said and let the vapor rise over that hole, then the ventoza will soon dissolve.
And properly ignite the ember according to its manner, and iterate that if necessary.
But in ventosa that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, where there is no cross-shaped handle nor hole, and it is not administered except to be filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
And this is its form: And the larger this ventoza is, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
Sanguissuguas are not administered on soft members, but rather on members where it is not possible to apply ventosas, due to their small size, such as the tongue and gums, which resemble them; or on a denuded bone, like the tip of the nose and similar ones.
And the quality of using those that you have found sanguisugas that are in the waters of pure burning mud.
And it should be left for the day and night in water until they are famished, and no cause remains in their belly; and it should be evacuated from the body through fleubotomia and ventozas; and it should be fumigated with a member of the patient until it becomes red; and it should be placed on top.
And when they are filled and broken.
And if it is possible to suck out the place with a ventoza, it is more expedient in judgment.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and appropriate water, and it should be fumigated and expressed.
And if the blood flows out of the body and onto the site where the sanguisugas are located, and it is there that they begin to sweat, then you should dip a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the sweating subsides.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol powder or guallas and similar substances that are stiptic causes on it until the blood is absorbed; or apply the ashes of excocicated beans to the location and let them adhere to it until the blood is absorbed.
And when it is necessary, iterate on the sanguisugas, whenever possible to change those.
And if the sanguisugas are prohibited from suspension, then wash the location with recent blood or insert an awl into the places until it bleeds; and then apply, because those that feel any blood soon become attached.
And when they start to clot, sprinkle a little bit of crushed aloen, or salt, or ashes on them, and cauterize immediately.
So begins the process of the third part: restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is restoration of fractures and dislocations that have occurred by chance in the bones.
Oh, son of mine, be wise and know that foolish doctors and the common folk, as well as those who have not read the books of the Ancients or have not even glanced at them for a moment, take pride in this chapter.
And because of this reason, the manner of the scientists in our land is privatized; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have not added anything that comes after, but only through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those things, until I extracted the science from them.
And I have directed my attention to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described everything that my science contains and on which the best experiment has passed; therefore, I have shortened this for you others and freed it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it in the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and formed it into many forms of instruments that are administered there, just as it was done in two previous chapters.
The first chapter!
A new chapter begins! It seems that the author is now introducing the main ideas of this chapter, as well as the framework for understanding the concepts that will be discussed. The title "Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol" suggests that the author is providing an overview or summary of the chapter's content.
It seems that the author is now providing guidance on how to approach a situation where a fracture or dislocation has occurred. The phrase "E donc dic que quan accideys" suggests that this is a warning or advice being given.
It seems that the author is now providing guidance on what kind of food and nutrition to provide for someone who has suffered a fracture or dislocation.
The author is now providing guidance on how to help the patient return to their normal routine and regimen.
It seems that the author is now providing guidance on what kind of food and nutrition to provide for someone who has suffered a fracture.
The author is now discussing the issue of osteoporosis and its relationship to age.
The author is now discussing the idea that nature has a way of compensating for and adapting to broken bones.
The author is now emphasizing the importance of providing the patient with food that is rich in nutrients and has a high viscosity, in order to facilitate healing and recovery.
The author is now emphasizing that the types of fractures can be diverse depending on the location and nature of the affected limb.
The author is now concluding the discussion on fractures and emphasizing the importance of remembering all types of fractures.
The author is now highlighting the diversity of fractures within themselves. The author is now highlighting the diversity of fractures within an individual's bones.
The author is now concluding the discussion on fractures and emphasizing the importance of remembering each type of fracture in its own unique context.
The author is now providing a summary or key point about fractures. The author is now describing the signs or indications of a bone fracture.
The author is now describing a situation where there is no obvious twisting or bending of the affected limb, and even when pressure is applied, the patient does not experience significant pain. The author concludes that in this case, there is no fracture.
The author is now suggesting that even if there is no obvious fracture, it is still possible that there may be some degree of twisting or bending (tortuositat) or a small crack (petita fissura). The author advises against applying excessive pressure or compression to the affected area, and instead suggests pausing to consider the relevant medications and their potential effects on the situation.
The author is now emphasizing the importance of recognizing and addressing any underlying issues that may be contributing to the fracture or injury.
The author is now providing guidance on how to treat an abscess that has developed in response to the fracture or injury.
The author is now emphasizing that restoring and dressing (agulacio) a wound on the soft tissue (lu) is generally easier than doing so on bone (os).
The author is now concluding by emphasizing the importance of remembering the key points discussed earlier.
The author is now discussing the need for surgical intervention in cases where a bone is fractured and has split into two parts.
The author is now discussing the importance of returning the fractured bone to its natural position and maintaining it there until the bone has fully healed.
The author is now emphasizing the importance of being cautious and careful in one's actions, especially when performing an operation or treatment on a patient.
The author is now emphasizing the importance of taking advantage of opportunities and making adjustments as needed.
The author is now describing a situation where the excessive stretching and compressing of a limb can lead to the development of an abscess or contracture, similar to what has been observed in the past through the operations performed by foolish doctors.
The author is now describing the quality of the bone structure that they are recommending, and emphasizing that each limb has its own unique characteristics in terms of size, shape, and form.
The author is now describing the wrapping or bandaging process for small limbs such as arms, hands, and fingers.
The author is now describing the wrapping or bandaging process for larger limbs such as the torso and legs.
The author is now describing the process of starting to wrap or bandage a limb that has been fractured, and emphasizing the importance of pausing to adjust the wrapping as needed.
The author is now describing the process of wrapping or bandaging a fractured limb, with an emphasis on ensuring that the wrapping does not put pressure on the fracture site. The author is now describing the process of gradually stretching and relaxing the wrapping or bandaging around the fracture site.
The author is now describing the process of applying a second layer of wrapping or bandaging over the initial wrapping, and emphasizing the importance of ensuring that the wrapping is even and smooth.
The author is now describing the process of applying a pause or break between layers of wrapping or bandaging to prevent any pressure or tension on the fracture site.
The author is now describing the process of applying a pause or break between layers of wrapping or bandaging, and emphasizing the importance of allowing the area to rest and recover before proceeding.
The author is now describing the shape and size of the stars (stelhas) that are to be used in the wrapping or bandaging process.
The author is now providing additional instructions for wrapping or bandaging a fracture.
The author is now providing instructions for the threads (fils) used in the wrapping or bandaging process.
The author is now discussing the importance of using threads that are not too thin or too thick.
The author is now discussing the importance of avoiding pressure or irritation on the patient's skin around the fracture site.
The author is now discussing the possibility of a fracture occurring in a specific area of the body (plaqua), and how it can lead to disruptions in the body's natural healing process (codena).
The author is now cautioning that it's not necessary to immediately wrap every broken limb with stars (stelhas) on the first day. The phrase "la qual causa es" means "which is due to", and the author attributes this to the fact that when a limb is large, it doesn't require wrapping with stars until after 4-7 days or more, depending on the patient's risk of developing an abscess (apostema caut).
The author is now concluding that this is the method used by the Ancients to treat fractures and other injuries, specifically wrapping them with a type of plaster (emplaustres) that was applied over the fracture site.
The author is now describing the method of applying emplaustra (a type of plaster) for treating fractures, specifically for women and children, as it is well-suited for this purpose. The text also provides instructions on how to prepare the emplaustra.
The author is now providing additional instructions on how to prepare the emplaustra.
Another method for an ointment to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is the root of salvaged melon seed, one ounce of each; of myrrh and aloes one ounce five; of alochil twenty ounces; all are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or album of honey if the patient's complexion is scaly; and it is appropriate to use this ointment, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and cures many men.
Another method for an ointment that cures fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh and white altorone one ounce ten; of myrrh and aloe one ounce five; of acacia six ounces; of Armenian balm twenty ounces.
The final sentence!
Another method for making an emplaustra!
The limitations of this emplaustra!
Another method for making an emplaustra!
A shortened method for making an emplaustra! The final instructions!
The exception!
Another method for making a stronger emplaustra!
The wisdom of Hippocrates!
The wisdom of Gualia!
A recipe for an emplaustra to treat lesions and pain!
The importance of proper application! The warning signs!
The treatment protocol!
The gentle approach!
The final touches!
The waiting game! The importance of patience!
The art of adjusting the constriction!
The importance of proper nutrition!
The mistake of the unwise restorers!
The wisdom of experience!
The next chapter!
The various types of fractures!
The extent of the injury!
The depth of the fracture!
The tiny fracture!
The fracture that's caused by impact or percussion!
The prevalence of this type of fracture!
The classification of fractures! The recall of previous knowledge!
The detection and investigation of fractures!
The detection of the capillary fracture!
The importance of considering the patient's symptoms in treating fractures!
The importance of addressing non-related symptoms!
The importance of studying the bone's anatomy!
The importance of considering the season!
The importance of identifying and treating comminuted fractures!
The importance of careful examination and diagnosis!
The importance of careful examination and treatment!
The possibility of multiple surgical approaches!
The description of two different surgical approaches!
The importance of using the right instrument!
The variety of instruments and their uses!
The importance of using the right instrument for percussion!
The importance of preparing the bone for drilling!
The importance of using the right drill bit!
The importance of having a variety of drill bits!
The description of three types of drill bits!
The importance of using the right instruments!
The importance of caution!
The importance of extracting and shaping the bone!
The importance of managing small, separated bone fragments!
The description of another surgical approach!
The description of the shape and alignment of the bone!
The importance of careful and controlled movement!
The importance of carefully removing any attached tissue or bone fragments!
The importance of smoothing out the bone surface!
The importance of carefully shaping the bone!
The importance of careful correction!
The reason why it is not necessary for all those who have studied this art to be proficient. The conclusion that we have reached through our writing!
The importance of dressing and bandaging the wound!
The importance of administering medicine to promote healing!
The importance of applying medicine to the wound!
The importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
The importance of considering the consequences of neglecting to treat a wound properly!
The use of medicine to treat a wound! The application of a poultice to the wound!
The third chapter!
The restoration of the nose when it is broken!
The anatomy of the nose!
The treatment of a nasal fracture! The importance of caution and care when performing surgery!
The treatment of a nasal fracture in the upper part of the nose!
The treatment of a nasal fracture that involves two parts!
The importance of early intervention and rest!
The use of a nasal splint!
The use of a nasal splint!
The importance of proper nasal splinting!
The flexibility of the treatment!
The use of a nasal poultice!
The use of a nasal poultice without infection!
The treatment of nasal bone fractures!
The treatment of nasal wounds!
The fourth chapter!
The restoration of the jawbone!
The diagnosis of a broken jawbone!
The treatment of a broken jawbone!
The treatment of a broken jawbone with a significant separation!
The treatment of dental trauma and disruption!
The importance of rest and relaxation in the healing process!
The correction of facial deformities!
The importance of patience and gentle treatment!
The treatment of secondary infections!
The treatment of compound fractures!
The treatment of severely damaged tissue!
The treatment of the wound!
The fifth chapter!
The treatment of a broken sternum!
The classification of sternum fractures!
The classification of sternum fractures into three categories!
The surgical procedure for treating a sternum fracture with a wound!
The importance of precise alignment and correction in treating sternum fractures!
The use of splints and bandages to immobilize the sternum!
The use of traction and manipulation to align the sternum!
The use of manual traction and manipulation to align the sternum!
The removal of damaged tissue from the sternum!
The use of a surgical instrument to incise the bone!
The description of the instrument's shape and size!
The description of the instrument's length and shape!
The closure of the wound with sutures!
The use of dressings and powders to promote healing!
The application of a poultice to promote healing!
The importance of regular checks and adjustments to ensure proper healing!
The importance of proper sleeping position and elevation for bone healing!
The importance of careful monitoring and observation!
The importance of renewing and adjusting the plaster!
The importance of patience and careful monitoring!
It seems that we've reached the end of the text! Well done on making it through!
The title of the next chapter!
The art of repairing a broken spatula!
The art of repairing a broken spatula (continued)!
The art of repairing a broken spatula (continued)!
The art of repairing a broken spatula (continued)!
The final touches on the repaired spatula!
The final check-up on the repaired spatula!
The final touch: applying the patient's own spatula!
The final result: the spatula is restored in 20-25 days!
The final step: dissolving the bond!
The final step: applying the finished repair!
The next chapter!
The art of repairing a broken leg!
The complexity of leg fractures!
The pain and discomfort of a broken leg!
The art of repairing a broken leg!
The art of casting and molding!
The art of troubleshooting and correction!
The next chapter!
The art of repairing broken ribs!
The anatomy of broken ribs! The importance of diagnosis and investigation!
The art of repairing broken ribs!
The challenges of treating broken ribs!
The ancient art of bone-setting!
The art of treating broken bones with ancient medicine!
The importance of caution and quick action!
The art of reasoning and caution!
The art of healing and wound care!
The art of surgical intervention!
The art of wound closure!
The art of treating abscesses!
The art of rest and recovery!
The next chapter!
The art of treating spinal fractures!
The signs and symptoms of spinal fractures! The art of diagnosing and predicting the outcome!
The signs of recovery!
The importance of observing the patient's symptoms!
The gravity of the situation!
The importance of prevention!
The treatment of abscesses!
The importance of rest and relaxation!
The art of closing wounds!
The art of setting broken bones!
The art of treating broken bones!
The tenth chapter!
The chapter on restoring the width!
The broken bones of the width!
The restoration of the width!
The process of realigning the bone!
The preparation for the restoration of the fracture! The final stages of treatment!
The final steps of treatment!
The importance of treating abscesses!
The importance of treating multiple fractures!
The eleventh chapter!
The restoration of the fracture of the arm!
The arm is the part of the body between the shoulder and the head.
The restoration of the fracture in two ways!
The two ligaments and the elevated location!
The patient lying on a stretcher, and the broken arm being placed on a wooden beam!
The arm is suspended and the fracture is reduced!
Another way to treat the fracture!
The extension is made stronger!
The fracture is near the muscle's extremity!
The fracture is near the shoulder blade!
The process of realigning the fracture!
The treatment of an abscess!
The method of securing the fracture!
Securing the arm and preventing further injury!
And use of splints!
The final stage: applying the splint!
The final step: securing the splints with tension!
The final touch: ensuring the tension is just right! The relationship between fracture length and tension!
The final step: securing the splints and tension!
The warning: if abscess occurs, wait 7 days!
The final consideration: 3 days of observation and correction!
The caution: wait at least 3 days before removing the splint!
The final note: patient positioning and comfort!
The final touch: securing the splint and monitoring progress!
The final instruction: regulating the patient's diet!
The final note: the length of treatment and post-treatment care!
The final warning: be cautious if the fracture is severe!
We've reached the end of the medieval medical text! The final chapter is titled "Capitol.xii.", which suggests that it may be a summary or conclusion of the entire text.
The final chapter: "De restauracio de fractura del bras"!
The anatomy of the arm!
The types of fractures!
The prognosis for a small fracture!
The prognosis for a larger fracture!
The worst-case scenario!
The treatment plan for a small fracture!
The treatment plan for a larger fracture!
The treatment plan for a compound fracture!
The treatment plan for a compound fracture of the arm!
The importance of proper support!
The application of traction!
The alignment of the bone!
The importance of proper bone alignment!
The importance of correcting irregularities!
The importance of treating wounds!
The treatment of abscesses!
The classification of fractures!
The application of traction!
The importance of gentle wrapping!
The final consideration! The treatment of complications!
The final instructions!
The final check!
The importance of nutrition!
The recovery timeline!
The final instructions!
The final revelation!
The final chapter!
A new chapter!
The importance of gentle treatment!
The treatment of fractures or dislocations!
The treatment of broken bones!
The application of poultices and dressings!
The treatment of a torn tendon!
The application of a splint!
The treatment of fractures in the outer parts of the hand!
The treatment of fractures in the fingers!
The treatment of fractures in other fingers!
The conclusion!
The final chapter!
The treatment of fracture of the coccyx!
The anatomy of the coccyx!
The treatment of fracture!
The treatment of fracture in the coccyx!
The treatment of fracture in the coccyx (continued)!
The treatment of fracture in the coccyx (continued)!
The treatment of fracture in the coccyx (continued)! The treatment of abscess in the coccyx!
The application of a bandage!
The application of a splint!
The application of a splint!
The application of a poultice!
The application of a bandage!
The application of a splint!
The importance of proper bandaging!
The importance of proper alignment!
The importance of proper alignment and support!
The importance of proper treatment and recovery!
The time it takes for the fracture to heal!
It seems that we've reached the final chapter of this medieval medical text!
The final chapter!
The final sentence!
The final words!
The final words!
The final instructions!
The final words!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
Interesting anatomical detail!
The connection between the thigh and arm!
The devastating consequences of double fracture!
The devastating consequences of double fracture in the thigh!
The devastating consequences of double fracture in the thigh!
The final instructions!
The final caution!
The final instructions!
The final wrapping!
The final placement!
The final application!
The final warning!
The final advice!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final thoughts!
The final caution!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final caution!
The final instructions!
The final instructions! The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final reminder!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final message!
The final treatment instruction!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final advice!
The final caution!
The final instruction!
The final warning!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final caution!
The final description!
The final flourish!
The final footnote!
The final instruction!
The final step!
The final caution!
The final instruction!
The final detail!
The final observation!
The final advice!
The final instructions!
The final warning! The final note!
The final guidance!
The final application!
The final advice!
The final warning! The final instruction!
The final caution!
The final reflection! The final instruction!
The final chapter!
The title of the final chapter!
The discussion begins!
The treatment of nodacio!
The final treatment instruction!
The final instruction!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The reasons why a fracture may not heal properly!
The final remedy!
The final step!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final warning!
The final warning!
The final remedy!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The definition of dislocation!
The importance of prompt reduction!
The importance of prompt action!
The importance of surgical intervention!
The importance of thorough treatment!
The organization of the text!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The treatment of mandibular dislocation!
The importance of gentle treatment!
The importance of prompt reduction!
The role of the minister and the surgeon!
The role of evaporation in reducing dislocation!
The final steps in treating a mandibular dislocation!
The importance of rest and gentle care!
The importance of gentle care and patience!
The consequences of failing to treat a mandibular dislocation!
The gravity of the situation!
The final chapter!
The final chapter: Reduction of Dislocation of the Furcula and the Extremity of the Muscle!
The furcula and its relationship to the jawbone!
The final steps in treating mandibular dislocation! The final touch: Securing the location with a firm grip!
The final step: Applying an emplastre and powder, and strengthening the location!
The final warning: Be cautious with the extremity of the jawbone!
The final guidance: Applying the treatment and commanding rest!
The final touch: Reducing the separation of the muscle from its location!
The final chapter: Conclusion and Final Thoughts!
The final chapter: Reduction of Dislocation of the Muscle!
The three ways the muscle can be dislocated!
The second way the muscle can be dislocated!
The tendency of the muscle to dislocate!
The consequences of mandibular dislocation!
The importance of proper treatment!
The importance of distinguishing between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle!
The importance of observing the symptoms!
The importance of early treatment!
The process of reducing the dislocation!
The treatment plan for persistent dislocation!
The process of repositioning the mandible!
The process of reducing the dislocation! The importance of careful handling!
The process of reducing the dislocation using another method!
The treatment for persistent dislocation!
The importance of gentle manipulation!
The process of applying the splint!
The process of repositioning the jawbone!
The process of applying the plaster cast!
The importance of gentle diet!
The importance of gentle exercise!
The use of cautery!
The consequences of unsuccessful treatment!
The process of reducing mandibular dislocation!
The importance of proper wound care!
The use of baths for relieving pain and promoting healing!
The final chapter!
The final section!
The challenges of treating condylar dislocation!
The importance of prompt treatment and caution!
The process of restoring the condyle!
The process of reducing a condylar dislocation in the anterior direction!
The importance of persistence in treating condylar dislocations!
The importance of using multiple assistants to ensure proper reduction!
The importance of carefully wrapping the arm in cloth!
The use of oil to facilitate joint movement!
The importance of proper immobilization after reduction!
The importance of proper removal of the splint!
The importance of repeated immobilization and observation!
The importance of gentle mobilization and observation! The importance of gentle manipulation and observation! Corruption has already spread over the denuded limb, until it is linen.
The importance of applying a poultice to aid in healing!
It seems that we've reached the end of the medieval medical text! Well done for making it through 28 chapters of ancient medicine.
The final chapter of the medieval medical text is focused on treating a specific type of condylar dislocation, namely "malassen", which refers to a dislocation between the arm and hand.
The importance of prompt reduction in the case of "malassen" dislocation!
The steps for reducing a malassen dislocation!
The importance of considering the patient's anatomy when reducing a malassen dislocation!
The importance of allowing the joint to settle and preventing further trauma!
The importance of considering the natural curve of the joint and not forcing it!
The final steps in treating a malassen dislocation!
The use of warm water and gentle friction to relieve stiffness!
We've reached the final chapter of the medieval medical text!
A new section!
It seems that we're getting a glimpse into the treatment of finger dislocations!
It seems that we're getting a glimpse into the treatment of finger dislocations at the base of the palm or on the palmar surface!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to stabilize and support the affected finger after reducing the dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to gradually increase the range of motion in the affected finger after reducing the dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to maintain and progress the recovery process after reducing a finger dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a finger dislocation at the palmar surface of the hand!
It seems that we're getting some general guidance on how to treat finger dislocations at various locations!
We've reached the final chapter of the medieval medical text!
A new section!
It seems that we're getting a warning about the seriousness of cervical spine dislocations!
It seems that we're getting some more information about the severity of cervical spine dislocations!
It seems that we're getting some information about the progression of cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some concluding remarks on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some final guidance on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some additional guidance on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some specific guidance on how to position the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to stabilize the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some specific guidance on how to immobilize the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to secure the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to stabilize the patient's spine!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the patient's condition doesn't improve with initial stabilization! It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to use the makeshift bed or stretcher to stabilize the patient's spine!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to set up a makeshift bed or stretcher for the patient!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to secure the patient's head and neck!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on the construction of the makeshift bed or stretcher!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to secure the patient's limbs!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to ensure the stability of the makeshift bed or stretcher!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to create a makeshift splint for the patient's spine!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to care for the patient once they are stabilized!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to manage any complications that may arise during the recovery process!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to manage a specific type of complication that can arise in the spine!
It seems that we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we're getting a title for this section!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to identify and treat a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting more guidance on how to identify and treat a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting more specific guidance on how to identify and treat a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting a description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting another description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting another description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting another description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to approach reducing the displacement of a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocated hip that is recent and severe!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocated hip that is not responding to initial treatment!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on the extent of the treatment for a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on the extent of the treatment for a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some information about the commonality of the extension treatment among the four types of dislocations!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the dislocation does not return to its normal position!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to reduce a dislocated hip when the dislocation is located towards the inside!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to use another minister to help reduce the dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some information about the ease of treatment for this type of dislocation!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the patient is not following the treatment plan!
It seems that we're getting some information about the length of each limb and the dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some information about the position of the patient and the distance from the ground!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to reduce a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to reduce a dislocated hip when the dislocation is located outside!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to set up the reduction process for a dislocated hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to perform the reduction procedure!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocation when it occurs at the front of the hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocation when it occurs at the back of the hip!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to apply compression to the affected area!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to complete the reduction procedure and ensure proper healing!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to ensure proper healing after the reduction procedure!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to determine if the dislocation has been successfully reduced!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if there is still some softness or inflammation after the reduction procedure!
It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to help the patient recover after the reduction procedure!
It seems that we've reached the end of the text!
The final section of the text!
The text is discussing the three ways in which the hip (denolh) can be dislocated!
The text is discussing the sign of hip dislocation!
The text is discussing the restoration of hip dislocation!
The text is discussing the sign of reduction (reddicio) of hip dislocation!
The text is discussing the treatment and care of the hip after reduction!
The text is discussing the recovery process after treatment!
The text is discussing the importance of gentle stretching in the recovery process!
We've reached the final chapter!
The final chapter!
The text is discussing the types of ankle dislocations!
The text is discussing the signs and symptoms of ankle dislocation!
The text is discussing the treatment and correction of ankle dislocation!
The text is discussing the treatment and correction of ankle dislocation when it occurs according to complement!
The text is discussing the positioning of the hands and feet in the treatment of ankle dislocation!
The text is discussing the treatment steps for ankle dislocation!
The text is discussing the repetition of the treatment steps!
The text is discussing the final step of the treatment!
The text is discussing the outcome of the treatment and what to do if the ankle doesn't return to its normal position.
The text is discussing what to do if the reduction of the ankle dislocation is not possible.
The text is discussing the role of assistants in stabilizing the patient's foot during treatment.
The text is discussing the role of the doctor and assistants in treating ankle dislocation!
The text is discussing the final stages of treatment for ankle dislocation!
The text is discussing the importance of protecting the nerves behind the ankle!
The text is discussing the aftercare instructions for ankle dislocation treatment!
The text is discussing the recovery period and restrictions after ankle dislocation treatment! The text is discussing the importance of not putting too much pressure on the ankle during recovery!
The text is discussing the treatment of an abscess or boil that may develop as a complication during ankle dislocation recovery!
We've reached the final chapter!
The final chapter!
The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation!
The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation that occurs in certain toes of the foot!
The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation that occurs in certain toes of the foot!
The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation that occurs in certain toes of the foot!
The final chapter!
The final chapter!
The text is warning about the risks associated with certain types of dislocations!
The text is emphasizing the importance of humility and caution in medical practice! The text is emphasizing the importance of early intervention and reduction of dislocation in medical practice!
The text is discussing the importance of proper wound care and management in medical practice!
The text is discussing the treatment of a dislocation with a fracture!
The text is concluding with a message of reverence and respect for the Creator! The final sentence! Amen indeed!
