Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the fulfillment of its consequences in it, and for its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that you will complete it for yourselves at this treatise, which is a part of my operation on hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation on hand was spread in our region and in our time of all private, until they strongly pierced the science of it, and its investigation is stopped; and I did not remain of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the most and induced error and hesitation until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and the art.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this hand in order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come with the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and other instruments of the work, as is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no artificial hand is found in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and it covers the skillful actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen understood until he knew the junctions of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and tendons, and the number of them, and their measurement; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their movement.
And for this, Hippocrates said that a name is moved, more in the small work, and greatly in the art of the hand.
We have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from error, for which many men die, thus as you have seen many of them, because they were formed in this science and took refuge in that science and its experiments.
Because you saw a foolish doctor who had attempted to incise an aposteme scrophilos on the neck of a woman, and incised certain arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed until the woman almost died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder which had progressed in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and cut that stone with an instrument of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called him to extract that, and I saw that due to the greatness of the stone and the disposition of the patient's body, he would die under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a bad incision on the patient's thigh, which was broken in his leg; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he made the fracture worse, above the wound, with poultices and bandages in strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dislocated the limb according to his foolish desires, and then he relieved it, and then he left it for several days, and commanded that we should not disturb the liament; and it was thus until the thigh and foot became apostematous, and he came to ruin.
And you were called to him, and he was forced to dislocate the liament, and he achieved tranquilization and thus alleviated his pains.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient became worse.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it became ulcerated in several days, until the evil of it was magnified in his lord's senses.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure of melancholic humor, and then it did not cover how it came to him from everywhere, but rather it was in the member which suffered from everything, as if it had been seized by all.
And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on hand should be divided into two devotions: one is an operation where health is associated, and another work where there is danger in major dispositions.
And you have already existed everywhere in this book where you found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are abolished and strengthened.
And you will be on the better way for the grace of God, perduring to health and laudable success, and you will leave the terrible evils of difficult sanation, and you will stop your arms from what makes you fearful, so that you may trust in your faith and in your name you will not be evasive: because more remains in your glory, and then it will be in the world and afterwards in your sanctities.
Sometimes I diagnose in certain evil hours: "There is no bad medicine for a bad patient, because bad doctors are not named."
"And I have devoted this book to three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrumens of the cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, on scission and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of extraction of arrows and of similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of treatment of torsion and of similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
"I consider the quality of the juvenations of that cauterization and of its instruments, and in what complexions it is prohibited to cauterize."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juvenation of cauterization and its instrument is a long and prolix sermon, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and I have taken a small part of their sermons, fearing prolivity."
"Therefore I say that cauterization corresponds to the whole universal complex, which is a matter or several matters, except for two complexes, which are cold complexes without matter."
"In the cold and dry complex, matter is disordered; for some said that cauterization is juvenation to that, and others said the contrary of that, that cauterization is not convenient in bad illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry bad illness is healed by cautery and dryness."
"And I say to those who say the contrary of that, that by cauterization it is made juvenation in all cold and dry bad illnesses that are in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complex of fire, you find men's bodies to be cold."
"And I say through the sermon of that, that I have experimented and already discovered many times."
"Moreover, I do not know who will come upon that which is already experimented and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by last exercise, and has known the diversity of men's complexions and the disposition of their illnesses in their metesises, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those."
"Moreover, in the other complexions, it is not about your fear, and mainly in the cold and humid illnesses, because already all doctors are agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the juvenation with cauterization in those."
"And you know, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization is fire and its goodness, so about cauterization it is a combined medicine, because fire is simple, its action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member unless it is adjusted with a small benefit."
"Moreover, the action of combined medicine penetrates to that in the members which are injured by it, and strengthens them to come into the difficult-to-heal member and strengthens them to listen."
"Moreover, fire, by its sublime simplicity and good substance, does not do anything except to superfluous; and it is already known to us through experiment and long service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for that I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that I did not read my own book in this passage to you, secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion through which it expels illnesses, is a philosophical demonstration, which would be acute in your steps."
"And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to do cauterization and pause at the best time of spring."
"And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the juvenation of that which has been cauterized, and mainly if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and firm, which do not suffer tardiness so that they are feared by those who come with evil, which is greater than small harm entering at the time."
"And thus it is not seen in your steps, or, sons, that which does not esteem except the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that illness which is healed by cauterization, it is not returned to all time, and pauses that consequence."
And the cause is not thus because the treatments are for that, since cautery is only in the place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause why pain occurs.
Perhaps emperor cauteries should be placed above the medicine to facilitate the value and virtue of its operation and greatness of his lord's wisdom.
And it is possible that the disease returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their disease, and its virtue, and what is prepared in his body by the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what has happened to him in his acquisition of vices and similarities to those causes; but since the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in few superfluities and humors, thus like cautery of teeth for pain and similarity to that, it is possible that the pain does not return there, rather what is done in small steps.
And the common opinion is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe it is not a cure that advances with medicine nor another cause that advances with cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and then at the end of the cause they administer cautery, and advance towards that. And from here it is clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of the gold and the limitation of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not break, as if it is not absolutely virtuous, since you have already experienced and demonstrated that it does not do that except in certain bodies with other things, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but when you make cautery with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it above the ignition, the gold melts per the focus, and in the focus certain laminae are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
And therefore it is done to make cautery with iron, we need to place it lightly and properly in relation to the direction of operation.
And now I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that the demanding one asks for what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the accidental service of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of swelling and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the divisions of the veins and auricles fluent, and multitude of sleeping, and of toothache and gout, and universally of all disease that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine from the head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and custom.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between his thighs on a heated bench and place his hands on the sole of his foot.
And then place the razor in the palm of your hand, and put your fingers on the razor between the nostrils. Perhaps emperor, as the finger of my mind has arrived at this place, it signifies that place with a probe, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form.
And then place that on the sensitive spot with a probe, in a manner that descends, so that the finger of my hand is constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand lightly and regard the spot, and if you see that some quantity of the head is discovered, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not turn your hand to that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the eye what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the spot and let it stand for three days.
And then place it on the covered cloth in a bundle and let it stand on top until the scar of the focus is destroyed. And then cure the spot with anguent tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
And thus they said that when the Roman plague increases, so much does the arm break, because it is better and more youthful.
They should remove some of the code that has been cautered on the outside of the bone, and hold the cautery inside so it reaches a certain part of the bone's structure.
Then return to adjusting the bone, and then take care of the cure.
They should also try to penetrate the bone with the cautery from behind, until it makes an impression on the strong bone, and this is the way to alleviate small pain. They estimate that at that place they release the vapors of the head.
And hold the open wound for a long time, and then take care to consolidate it until it is healed.
But I have not seen these two species of cauteries in all cases, only in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, I, better is my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity with the aid of the same, as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first species of cauteries is most safe and better for me; and from that house and in that work I am healthy.
Following chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When the whole head suffers from chronic and long pain, and it is in a prolonged patient, and uses remedies such as poultices and cups and capstones and implants and gauze and bandages and wrappings, and mainly if it has been cautered with a cautery that recounts and does not bring relief to any of those causes, then consider why the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and troubled by great cold, then that cauterying is done with another cautery below that one. And then cautery that one on the horn of the dry head with a cautery until the code is divided. Cut the code and discover the quantity of bone that we have recounted and cautered with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the windy pulse is felt. And lift your hand in this way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient for that reason suffers great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cautered in the middle of the head; and this is the way of it.
Third chapter.
About the cautery of non-ancient migraines.
When there is pain in the head, or it is sudden pain until the eye, then evacuate with mondifying medicines of the whole head, and administer another cure, which you have described in the devotions of the illnesses; and if not relieved, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
One cauterying medicine is burning, which you take a piece of alum, and scrape that and bind the extremities of it to both heads. And then cut into the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the hidden place below the code, until it is concealed.
And then strengthen it over the place with a stopped constriction, and let it be for three hours; and then remove it and pull out the alum, and let the wound be for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged cot in order that the place makes a scab.
And then heal that one by sweating until it is healthy.
And if you see, I have already written about some burning medicines which I have inscribed in the two treatises on burning medicines.
One cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cautering of which this is the way.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus cum formed like a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is beneath is not hurt — and turn the small iron slowly with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is hurt by the specularity of the code is thus as the magnitude of it, and hold your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not hurt, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak the cot in salt water and pause it on the place, and let it be for three days; and then hold the cot mulched in a border, and then heal by sweating until it is healthy.
And if you see, cauterying is done on the extremity of the cuticular according to cauteries, and beware of cutting into an artery in this non-ancient migraines properly.
Fourth chapter.
About the ancient method of cauterization for emigration.
When you treat emigration, you should do what we have said about previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and not delay the treatment, and sometimes because of the disease that does not respond to what we have said of the first cauterization in medicine or of the focal point of burning, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery cutting into the part where it is whitened, since it indicates above the line of the long wound which is the greatest part of what was said; and hold your hand for a while and strengthen it until you cut through the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Therefore it is necessary for you to preserve the continuity of the jawbone, which is essential for chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged, so that no spasms occur.
And it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is affected, because in the affection of it there is fear, and especially to he who ignores what he does and is not studious and experienced; and thus the operation begins in him from the commencement.
And you will find a reminder of the regulation of blood flow in the affected artery according to the suitable manner, in the same place of this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the same place on the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of straightening of arteries with two points of burning, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more convenient.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of ear pain.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and another treatment which we have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form.
And place the point at the ignition, and it should be led around the entire ear as if rotating, or in a circle of several times if the pain is somewhere. Gently apply the cautery to the root of the ear, little by little, so that you slowly feel the spot in tension.
And if you apply the cautery to several points on the entire ear, and thus it is, and then treat the spots until they are healed.
Chapter 6.
On the cauterization of turture (torture?).
Torture which is treated and cauterized is not only of the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
It is necessary to cauterize the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that species of torture with herbs and headwashings and garglings, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the same temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And hold your cautery for the contrary part of the affected limb, because mollification is only seen in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, then rising a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the aforementioned wound, and hold your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatness of the species of the codena is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutellary, the form of which is described in the table. Moreover, it is necessary to subtly understand that one should not be too hasty; and it is necessary to cut off the excess flesh a little.
And then treat the spot until it is fully processed and healed.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not confer and the disease has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the same place on the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more hidden; and then it should be treated with what processes.
Chapter 8.
About the cauterization of oblivion made for weakness.
Because it is given to the patient at the beginning of the illness, large pills and pellets are administered in a significant amount.
And then place the entire head of the patient on the wooden block of this described instrument in the treatise on surgical appliances.
And hold those heated irons, because that is the manner of cautery. And do it according to the method in which I have already spoken.
And then if the patient is thus; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the nape of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then take care to make the cautery with that which is proceeding.
But if you find the patient is tolerant, then make the cautery in the middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize over both horns.
Then take care that it enters so that it may be healthy; and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
About the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the entire body.
Because you should proceed in moderation of the head with heat and with that which I have said; and then place the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery on the middle of the head, and cauterize over all the horns of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those and the patients are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually make the cautery until it is combined from the code of the motive of it, and raise the dead flesh. And then take care that it enters so that it may be healthy, and let this cautery be olive-shaped.
Chapter 10.
About the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
And so it is necessary to moderate the brain of the patient at the beginning of his years and another cure which I have dictated in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gentle purges and masters of the serving moderation, beforehand with that for many days, in order to improve the digestion.
And then place the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occiput, and on each horn of the head it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with cauteries which I have said, having paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what has been previously stated.
But if the patient is an infant, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
About the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great weakness, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said in the paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that moderates his brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And then place the patient's head, and then make a moderate circular motion decently made from them around the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held by all parts.
And then apply an ointment; it is more worthy of soothing the old wounds. And heat it over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which I have said suffers when it is mixed in it. And then put it in the middle of the patient's head in a circle, and let it enter so that it may be refreshed.
And do it to the patient for a whole week, another regimen of good being until he is healthy; or if you wish, cauterize it making small points according to the size of it, but not holding the hand with one cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humidifies the brain in equality.
And then apply that cooked in an oven or in grey cloths of wadding.
Chapter 12.
About the cauterization of water descending into the vein.
When you have declared the commencement of water in the vein through the channels which you have diagnosed in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient so that it will modify the top of the head, and guard against total humidity.
And make him sweat in a bath for ten days.
And command him to shave the top of his head, and cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on two temples if the commencement of water is in two veins, or one side if the commencement of water is in one vein.
Indeed, you will cauterize all the veins and arteries which you have diagnosed as being in the codeina; and place the cauteries in that length at the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or apply some medicine to him, which is possible for you.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and absorption of those, and caution against fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauteries, immediately producing a remedy.
Chapter 13.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When the tears of the veins are old and accustomed through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water flowing in the veins, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the temples, and with two cauteries between two bones. And if you find signs of addition, then cauterize it on the entire side of the vein above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the Cauterization of Fetid Nasal Discharge.
When you medicate him with what we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give drink to the patient through three nights; and return his head, and cauterize it with a smaller pointed cautery or an olive-shaped cautery. And then cauterize it with a cross-shaped cautery or two cauteries on the two eyebrows beneath the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery that you do not inflame there.
And of the cross-shaped cautery, this is the method.
Chapter 15.
On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery in the shape of this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
And if you do, cauterize it above the two eyebrows, a small one with two cauteries on the entire partition, and thus elongate the temporal areas. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vein when the Skin is Converted into Fleshy Parts and Pounds the Vein.
When the skin of the vein is converted into fleshy parts and pounds the vein, cauterize it in two manners, because either a hot iron or a burning medicine is applied.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to lie down on that which releases the skin thus as those who are accustomed to, until they are prolonged and thickened; and if you pound that which is deviated from its natural position, then strengthen the veins of it with a band so that it will not be moved until the skin is born.
Then when they are born and thickened, then place the head of the patient in a straight position, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of it with a tent, like a signal according to the figure of a dead leaf, and let it be the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
And then place a cotton or an album of wool or a patch of platinum over the vein.
And then ignite the cauteries, of which this is the form.
And then cauterize above the figure which has been signaled, little by little, in vacant moments, until the surface of the codeina is burned, which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
And the signal of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the vein already contracted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the vein.
Then raise your hand and let it be there for three days, and then place it over the affected area to border on the scar that is being formed. And then treat it with an ointment that penetrates until it is healed.
But if it returns to the skin for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cautery it until it returns to its natural position and is equalized, so that the skin does not bulge out.
But the cautery is a medicine that burns, which commands the patient to raise their skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a paper template in the shape of a mirror's frame.
And then take soap made from congealed goose fat and living snake oil. I think there might be some issue with the text, as "conogut" doesn't seem to be a real word in any language, and "caus viva ana unc" also looks like a mix of words that don't make sense together. Where it is, and mix those causes well, and make it into a paste for so that it is not frozen; and spread it on the paper which was made thus in the shape of a mirror's frame, and place it on one side of the wound, and place below the wounded area in a container of warm water, and the patient's head should be in a straight position.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little and don't touch it until the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, because sensation is in them just like fire.
And thus, as you perceive that the other sensation is felt, then lift the medicine and move it to the straight finger; thus, when the sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted just like it has been washed of constriction or incision, because then it will be; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was not applied, and it does not deteriorate until your operation is equalized and the wound is constricted.
And then place it over the affected area to border until the code of the adjustment is eradicated, and then treat it with an ointment of definite correction or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, because of your operation, to keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the wound, and if the eyelid is softened in some days and some skin bulges out on the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly, just as you did at the beginning, and then heal it.
And this is the shape of a mirror's frame.
And you know that the wounds of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what has been done, your contraction is made.
And it will not be mistaken the way of right treatment for that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the Cauterization of Fistulas that are in the Tear Duct of the Eye.
When you treat a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary to cautery it thus: command the patient to place their head straight, and hold the head of some minister between the hands more in such a manner that it is neither moved nor agitated by the straight head.
And then place the hot iron in a container of warm water or in a poultice of lint on the wound of it.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
which should be conical, just as it is in the shape of a reed or a point of a volturer, at one extremity where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate until the other extremity. And if you want it to come out just as it was held.
But perhaps that which is burned is better at the straight work.
And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the liquid and dry it. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place it over the wound, the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your straight hand a little away from the cautery of the wound at the bridge of the nose, so that you don't err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the wound and corrupt it.
And thus, at the beginning of the straight cautery, I see into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place it over the affected area to border and surround it with an ointment exsiccatiu until it is healed.
If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is written in the seventh chapter.
And it is another manner of cautery for fistula, which the first wise men discovered: then at the place of the fistula and make a hole there and stop in that fissure as subtly as possible the shape of it; And put in that the quantity of an ounce of melted lead; and you have your hand on it with good retention, and do not let the patient move so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the bottom of it; and cover it with a cloth soaked in albumen or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cautery and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body according to how it will return to its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the wound of the toes.
Certain wounds hidden in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore when you treat those wounds as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is shown.
And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then stop putting that instrument carefully into those wounds until the cautery penetrates to the bottom of the wounds.
And then heal that wound with cerate until it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an aposteme and then make a break, and then it is ruptured, and then it is antiquated, and correct the break and it becomes a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then cover how you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignited thing into the hole of the fistula, and you have your hand on it until the iron ignites at the bottom of it, and afterwards make a scab or two; and then heal that wound as we have said about the treatment until it is healthy.
And therefore if the wound is abscessed and is healthy, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and stop the corrupted bone according to how it will return to its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cautery of teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loosened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then stop the head of the patient in the position where it is, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come thus, in this way that you stop the lantern over the tooth and enter into it the ignited cautery firmly, and you have your hand on it until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you want.
And then the patient rinses their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and afterwards stops that, because the loosened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is stiffened and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter 21.
On the cautery of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not confide in the treatment with medicine, then cautery on that is according to two manners: either cautery with the iron of a cow, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with the iron of a cow is that you take an iron of a cow and burn it in a hot fire, and then take it out and wrap it over the extremity of the tent, and then merge it into the burnt iron, and stop it on the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the lantern or iron in the aforementioned iron, and stop it on the painful tooth, and stop over the ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the bottom of the conquest of the tooth.
Moreover, the emperor ordered that cautery with fire is that you attend to the lantern of iron or copper, and it be in the heart of some gross and the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and you have your hand on it until the cautery is cooled; and do that several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
And you should cover the area where you applied the cautery to the patient's mouth, good and wide, hold it for an hour, and then scrape off the excess.
You should cauterize as much as you can according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter 22.
On the Cauterization of Deformed Feet.
When deformed feet are of a phlegmatic and cold humors nature and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this following, having two hubbled extremities so that they receive the fumigation from the cautery on the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if it is indicated for that, until it reaches the root of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause over the swollen area in a good manner until what the fire has consumed is removed.
And then cure that wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the Cauterization of Sciatica and Constriction of the Wings.
When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by complexity, then you should evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the root of the gouty vein in the affected area.
And beware that you do not penetrate the cautery to the gouty vein nor burn the cord of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the spine in the rear vertebrae of it. And the cautery of it should be shaped like a key according to the preceding manner.
And then cure that wound with what has been mentioned previously until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
When cough and lung disease are of cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor tisis, and it is an ancient disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas, and another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and shape the cautery like a key according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, your cautery should be point-like with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which is mentioned in the chapter on pain in the ears.
And do so until it reaches those areas; and then cure that wound with what has been mentioned previously until it is healed.
And there the cautery has three ramps because the cauterization is done in this way: at one time you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the Cauterization of Ticklishness which is the Head of the Helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and does not remain in its place at the hour of its return, until it returns to its usual custom, and then for a small movement it is displaced, as we have testified, then you should first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is reversed over the two hips or on the sides; and then elevate the cord which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cauteries that are applied with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or three point-like cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and humidity come into the stomach to extract its completeness and multiply the raumases within it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confuse them, then you should place the patient on their back with arms extended and legs stretched out, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the chest, until the figure of the triangular cautery is formed; and extend between those who are not adjusted so that they will be purged.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the amount of the two tender parts of the greatness of the coding.
And the figure of the cautery is added in this way, And if you wish, make a great cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a circular cautery according to this form.
And the stomach is cautered at that point where he who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the amount that you wish to hold, and then cautery that with the cautery at the points; and then heal that with the cure that precedes until it is sanctified.
Chapter 27.
On the cautery of the feverish foot.
When the foot is in pain due to cold or humidity or gross windy excess until the normal complete complexion is affected by superfluous egress, and it is cured with the gout that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their bed, and feel held by three cauteries according to this form and quantity, measuring on the foot below the hips, where one perceives the decubitus of man.
And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the greatness of the said, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
And if the amount of water that is absorbed is equal to the amount of the mattress of the specificity of the coding, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their legs.
And it is possible for you to cautery these cauteries with a cutellar cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cautery, and let the specificity of the entire coding be absorbed so that the entire body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, because the coding here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will have grave gravity and pain will be acute.
And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is very acute and many times the doctors are exhausted from treating it.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be inverted on their bed; and then anoint the place of the abscess with holding; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rag, in the form of which has been preceded on the other page. And cautery that with this cautery until the entire coding is combined, until it reaches the siphac, until it reaches the sane sanity.
And then heal that by cure of the other abscesses until it is sanctified.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless that which the student has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are known; however, I have experimented on some patients and it was harsh about this operation, however, I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On the cautery of phlegmasies.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for phlegmasies are made according to this manner and essence, and it is that which you take from the roots of Aristology, a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the greatness of the said.
And then submerge it in oil and expose it to the fire, and then cautery with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and make two cauteries where it declines between the fifth rib and the cistern, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and make one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather it is in the manifestation of the coding in work.
And thus I have described the ancient cauteries that are ancient of men who use iron-like cauteries resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and sanctified sanity, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
In this perforation, do not use cautery, because it is sometimes so violent that it aggravates the fistula and does not bring healing.
Chapter xxx.
On the cauterization of the mesentery.
When you treat the mesentery disease with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are trustworthy, one of which is to make three or four lines according to the length of the mesentery, following the figure of the cauteries on the finger, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the width of a finger or a few inches, and the manner of the cautery should be the manner which we have described in the cauteries on the finger, in agreement.
And do not press your hand against the cautery; and the patient should be seated on a stool with their back straight.
And there is another way of cauterizing, so that you should ignite the cautery having two vertiments, which causes have been described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and it raises the codeine which is at the end of the mesentery where the patient feels the pain on the sinister side.
And let your elevation be the one that raises the codeine according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two vertiments, ignite the motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the codeine on the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus you will make four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertiments.
And then you will cure the cautery, because it has stayed for three days, and it is more comfortable than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Chapter xxix.
On the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauteries are not applied in hydropsy unless in a constricted area properly.
When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which have been described in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries be four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the mesentery, and one cautery on the feet, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the specific condition of the codeine.
And then leave the cautery open so that it takes hold for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment then with the cautery, because it is necessary for them to be added to their two intentions, and they will be helped by a healthy salvation.
The shape of the cautery is what is cauterized on the belly is clave-shaped according to what its shape was previously, and it is what is cauterized on the back that is olive-shaped according to its preceding shape.
Chapter xxxii.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostemated in hydropsy and replete with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and raise your hand over the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it entirely, because the stagnant water resolves.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery should be made at the extremity of the cutting cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one below the knee and the other in the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And then leave the open wound for a long time, so that some stagnant water resolves from it.
And then cure them with those causes which we have described.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the cauterization of the belly and intestines.
When the belly and intestines are cold and humid inside, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those methods of treatment and not confused, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting a cautery of virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the upper stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries around the navel subtly, with a clave-shaped cautery subtly; and a cautery on the alcatin above great aloes, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities exhibit themselves and the patient suffers, then cauterize it on the pentenilh and on the intestines, and strengthen them by adjusting two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, because it is a perfect cure of juvament which does not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or humidities that are corrupted, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confound the timely cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small spine of the back and triangular, and with a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
And if you find that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes breaks out in pimples, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been prescribed; and with one cautery on the forehead, and another cautery on their back with a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and afterwards cure them from within so that they may be healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of athyal, suitable for their abscesses.
When you excise an athyal, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into that excised athyal, and ultimately stop the timely moment when you perceive the cautery at the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make one or two trips, because if they achieve healing, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and afterwards cure those who are afflicted with it, so that they may be healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the elbow, it is more durable in its healing.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the parts of the body.
When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Then when you see a fistula in the old nature, and it is antiquated, corroding its health and humidities that are corrupted, and then it is more worthy to cover it with a subtle thread, and afterwards measure the quantity of the profundity of it according to the aforementioned thread.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. And then place that ignited cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the thread.
And repeat over that cautery until the corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And afterwards cure the place until it is healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and you have excised from it the materials, and it remains thus for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting the bone, or something from those causes which will bring reminiscence to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the shinbones.
When in the shinbones there is pain due to cold or gross humidity, and for that reason the thigh of the patient is weakened, then cover it so that you cauterize above the shinbone with a cautery above each shinbone with a claw-shaped cautery from which proceeds the reminiscence.
And strengthen their cauterization according to the second small space, so that three linear cauteries will come, and then they will be more durable in healing.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debilitation and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize it in the part below the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize it with a cautery in the part below the lowest back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the claw-shaped cauteries be according to what has been prescribed.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix (or womb).
When cold and humidity come to the matrix (or womb), and for that reason conception is prohibited, and its menses are corrupted, and it is delayed the provocation of them, and there is pain in the having of them, then cover so that the place is cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical region, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery above the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and let the claw-shaped cauteries be.
Chapter 40.
About the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture accumulates and is retained in the ankle joint, and it causes inflammation of the surrounding tissue, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is treated with a warm bath.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have sensed the tension in the circuit of the ankle joint, and thus it revolves, and for this reason the ankle joint falls into its proper place in the circle.
And this is the cautery that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that man with three cauteries, or cautery of the large olive-shaped (instrument).
And this is done according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then cure that one who enters so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 41.
About the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that is antiquated, then it is necessary to remove the patient from gross humors through foul-smelling pills or artificial semblances; and then cauterize that.
And the manner of the cautery in this case is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medications, or cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that which cauterizes the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do it with good depth. And the space which is between each cautery is the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Sometimes it is necessary to place the cauteries on the middle spot on the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle in which the form is precised in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and it will be a complete circle containing and burning the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in ciatica when pain is adhering to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Sometimes if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width above the affected part.
And if the cautery is cuticular, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient's pain is extended into the place close to the fingers of the feet, then cauterize that here where it pains with three points or four, or maybe even more, depending on what is indicated by that.
And if the patient's pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that here with a cuticular cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that it burns nerves or large arteries, and for this reason you are above the patient's bad nourishment or contradiction.
And you have already seen one or another of those who cauterized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the bad fire inflated into the tumor that had reached the foot, and the foot was perforated and corrupted throughout. And then a strong solution of wine, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise men have said in the cauterization of the ankle joint that this is the manner: make a semblance to an iron circle whose circumference is the width of one palm; and it should be four fingers or a little less than the thickness of a finger bone.
And divide that circle into another third; and the space between them is the quantity of the knot of the foot; and those circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those chains is one knot or two knots, and make in those margins of iron decently adorned with the circles; and this is their form.
Then it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks, and then placed on the ankle joint, the patient's limb is bandaged over the cloth. And then cauterize that with three red-hot cauteries at once.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a dressing with a bandage and leave the ulcerated plague for many days; and then cure that with an ointment until it is healthy.
Says Albucassis: Oh, my sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for that reason few have found those which regard it above.
More of those who suffer from burning heat, and seek relief in that place.
Many cauteries are adhesions that you make two circles having a perforated armula in which you insert the hook of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the narrowness of their shoes, or those who have two nodes or knees.
And if the space which is between them is according to the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they are opened from below and above, and they contain themselves between their joints according to this form.
And then stop above the affected part of the water, and comprehend your hand above the affected part of the water; and take hot water in a font between two circles, and the quality of that is as much as a small fire, and hold it for the duration of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the adjustment of it — because that burning bites thus from the fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and separate the hot water from all of the affected part in warm water.
And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remaining part is seen, and leave it like that for some days, and correct its purification; this is the final stage in healing.
And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make a statue in it that contains water according to what is done in the affected joint.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of cause not extinct from two or one part, and crush them and stop in a new vessel of which the affected part below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
And stop below the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkali and cause of warm water which takes them for one finger, and since you comprehend them with the good compression of your hand, and let it descend from the sharp water in the affected part below to the vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another cause of warm life and other alkali renovating, because that hour will be of much strong acuteness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And it is of the medicines some which are those that are cauterized often, thus you will find tincture and honey and cause in a wise mixture, so that they are well mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which is cured pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed by a visit thus as recommended, since he strengthens him so much in bath and exercise, and already knew of that.
And it is that he takes of certain fresh green, and if not found fresh green, take recent fig; and much is crushed into a few gray ones and placed on the affected part in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and bind.
And it is left for a duration of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put him in bath and then when his body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
And you know that it's not necessary to burn with cauteries in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Many times Escorides says that when the vein of the goat's foot is cauterized, it benefits him; and it is the cautery in the following manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dry goat's foot and inflame it in fire until it is made charcoal; and then stop it on the wool and let it until it is extended. And then repeat this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the biting pain passes into the water and rests the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cautery of cow's foot.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain in the toes.
Some pains in the toes are due to many causes, such as through bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not used except in this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes in which there is pain three lines according to the latitude of it, since you have ten in each line or cauteries, or more, according to the quantity that one sees of the tolerance of the patient and of its virtue.
And if it is necessary to perform pointed cautery treatment.
If you wish, treat with three or four cauteries or with a median clavicular cautery following this method.
Chapter 43.
On the treatment of gout at its commencement.
Softened bandages are applied to this illness in small children; and the sign of its commencement in children is that it settles on their legs and ankles, causing elevation and limitation of movement.
And ulcers form on the posterior spine of the back and on the nodes of it that have begun to overlie on top of the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize around that spot with a circular cautery in the following manner. which takes hold of the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine.
And if you wish, treat in a circle around the spine with a pointed cautery of two lines or three. And space the points properly between them.
And then heal the area within, which will be healthy with what we have said.
Be careful that the cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On the treatment of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus how gout caused by cold is cured in a manifold way of treatment and the pains are not relieved, then they are relieved with cautery.
And it is that you should perform cautery treatment with evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And this is the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains penetrate to the teeth or other joints, and there are many worn-out bandages, then cauterize that spot with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed for this treatment, then perform the cautery and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, just only surround the affected area of the codeina.
And if the pains penetrate to the tooth and back, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the masses, and it is called sciatica, then point around the circle of the hip joint thus as it revolves, pointing to those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circle of the hip joint on each node and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains penetrate to the nearby joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire adjacent part.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the evacuation is done with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are dislocated from their proper place, and this is the beginning of the injury, then it is necessary that you order the patient to remain quiet for seven days and use gentle remedies so that the wound may heal in seven days.
And then place the patient between your hands over the seventh vertebra, and command them to hold their body straight so that it may be set in its proper place or the intestines or limbs may be restored.
And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew it up to hold the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, signifying the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the sublime parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
until it becomes very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that spot with your hand on the cautery standing upright, and thus you will have consolidated the bone of the pelvis into the middle of the spine; and afterwards, apply another bandage if you have not succeeded in the first bandage to consolidate the bone.
And carefully observe the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery treatment, so that you do not harm the intestine and thereby prevent the patient from coming to death or other great evil.
You should know that when you have a cautery, do not touch the bone, nor does it hinder your operation.
And it is fitting that the cauteries for children should be subtle according to their age and measure.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, so that the scar from the burning is removed.
Then treat those who have other injuries until they are healed.
The patient should sit on his back for 15 days so that the area and the wound may be sealed.
And it is fitting that the nutrition of the patient should be adjusted according to the length of time of their treatment, which reduces the fatigue of their stomach, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
Then when they want to get up after 15 days, administer gentle and moderate food, and keep them on it for another 15 days.
And let them be moderate in their work and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, for when they use this entire regimen of healing, they will be healthy.
And you will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that they do not delay, then cautery the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its quantity, and it is what is extracted from the codena thus as the third part of it; and then treat those who have said, and it is not adjusted.
And you will first direct that the rupture should be cautered with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is signed on the tendon:
and it is a paused line that goes along the latitude in the flesh because it surrounds the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a curved cautery, but the first cautery is more gentle and better.
Chapter 46.
On the Cauterization of the Throat.
When pain is caused by a blow or percussion in the members and persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is fitting that points should be cautered with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery of each member should be according to its size and smallness, and its position and development, and location of the throat and pain of it.
So if it is healthy from the first cautery, well; and if not, then repeat over him the cautery; because it is customary for those pains that are punctured in a member to that member which approaches the one, so that it is fitting that they are treated with the cautery until the patient is healthy.
Chapter 47.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
The leprous sores are often treated with a cautery for great benefit, and especially if the species of leprosy is made worse by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And so when you want to cautery that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient that corruption comprehends the entire body of him and all its complexity, then cautery that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and at the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, above the nape or service.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little within, so that it presses on the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated; and cautery on the middle according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is fitting that you cautery it with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two molar teeth, and two cauteries on the two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the calves, and one on each calf, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the seven feet; and cautery it on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the soles of their fingers.
And beware of the nerves which are above the ankle that you do not burn them.
And some sores are cautered with a cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more benefit and the more they confer; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus as they have said, because the body of him is already stupefied.
It seems that the patient should be advised to have large or small cauterizings according to the members and joints as preceded by the species of the instruments.
And then heal the cautery wound with fern root, which is good in this case and another cure within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the cautery of numbness or stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you should cautery that numb member with cauterizings according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate deeply into the thickness of the codena, a little. And then heal that which is swollen within so that it may be healthy.
And sometimes veins are cautered for numbness which goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and it is shown that the flow of the nerves which govern that member is hindered, and the numbness is removed.
There is no presupposition about this except that which is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the cautery of ulcers that are morphic.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to the application of medicines, then you should cautery on that place with a pointed cautery a little according to the quantity of the speciousness of the codena within so that whiteness and the color of it may be removed, and its color may be changed.
And then heal that with fern root and lentils oil rose and leaves of arnagrosa, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, from each one a part and all are mixed, and then anoint with a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On the cautery of cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove that, then cautery with a circular cautery around the area of it, thus as it is turned around.
And I advise that it should be cautered with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it has not been seen, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and already I have seen some veins.
And it is better to cautery in a circular fashion around the area as we have said, or with many small cauterizings.
Chapter 51.
On the cautery of indurations.
When some indurations are delayed in maturity, and thus it is due to the superfluity that makes them, or because of the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturity of the indurations; then cautery around the area with many small pointed cauterizings; and afterwards leave it, for it will fasten in maturity.
But if you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and place it in the middle of the induration until it penetrates the codena.
And if you cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal it until it is healthy.
Chapter 52.
On the cautery of corroding ulcers.
Corroding ulcer is a corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that thus as a fierce fire consumes dry wood.
Then if you want to cautery that corroding ulcer in the place where it suffers from heat, then ignite many small pointed cauterizings, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corroding.
And then cautery that from every part until you eradicate all the corrosion and no root of it remains.
And then leave it for three days, and apply over the cautered areas a triple layer of oil mixed with scar-absorbing substances until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
And then heal that with flesh-forming ointments.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains rotten in the corrupted areas.
And corroding ulcer is treated with some medicines with sharp medicine, because that is half of the cautery treatment. But Emperor's cautery with fire is to be used more lightly, especially for juvenation.
And I have already said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when the hours are opportune.
Chapter 53.
On the cautery of fractures and other similar ones.
Many veins go to the lower parts of the foot affected by a fracture, which is called a gross, deep-rooted cause, which hurts the foot; and cautery in those is according to two manners, thus it is cautered with fire and cautered with hot water.
More cauteries are made at the fire so that they ignite with a similar pain to a burning sensation, which is done according to the quantity of the entire affected part, and it is subtle margins.
And then stop the ignition on the nail, and return your hand to the cautery in the circuit of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it like that for three days until you start to feel better. And then apply a plaster made with softening salvias mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place affected by generating new flesh until it is healthy.
And if it doesn't convert, and you have swollen veins on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then it is clear that you should administer those cauteries with water, and it is that you take a cannula of iron or fire or burning sensation, and stop that on the nail; and then pour a little quantity of hot water, and return your hand, and you return it to compression with your entire hand, and it will be on the margin of the cannula in the root of the nail, and you will find the hot water flowing through the root of the toe; and wait for the patient a little while for the absorption of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus it is done to those and then I proceed to the other until you are done with all the joints of their body.
And then heal those pustules because the roots of the nails have been eradicated, and the flesh will be regenerated.
Chapter 3.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When you have a tremor due to cold in the nerves or because of fever from a cold cause, or for another similar reason, then it is clear that you should cautetrize with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and place a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, a cautery on the olive-shaped part.
And the tremor of it will rest and strengthen the health of the patient's cold affliction.
Chapter 4.
On Cauterization of Accidental Injuries to the Body.
When the body is accidentally injured, and there are pustules that are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore it is clear at the beginning how it appears, that it should be cauterialized over every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery full of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended to the fire; or with a root of long eresticology; or with a slow cautery.
And swollen veins are cauterialized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and if they are not believed, and the superfluous flesh is dispersed, then it will heal itself.
More often it happens that this should be done by evacuation with bloodletting.
Chapter 6.
On Cauterization of Fluxes of Blood Accidentally Caused by Incision of Arteries.
Many swollen veins accidentally cause fluxes of blood that are incised by the wound which it has in front, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove that.
Then, when it happens to those, then you should touch with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop on that the tied thread is stretched until the swollen veins are stopped from the flux of blood flowing through the tied thread, and that does not go out.
And then stop in the fire the olive-shaped cauteries, few and large, by name of many, and exhale on those until they are not ignited.
And then take from those a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, above that vein firmly, because you will have removed the tied thread, and you will retract the cautery until it is bound and restrained, and the blood is restored.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the tied thread and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restrained.
And beware that you do not touch the nerves which are here, and that another evil comes over the patient's other evils.
And know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four methods: or by cautery as I have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it is tied with a faithful ligature, or that it is stopped over the medicines from which the virtue is to restrain the blood; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar by decent constriction.
Those who administer restraints in a decent way on the wounded limb and with strict structure, avoid drops or positions that cause constrictions and similarities, not comforts but tartness.
But if there is an end to the ailment and it's not a doctor present nor medicine, then make a pause in the treatment indicated on that orifice of that vein thus as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood may be stopped from the superior part of the plague, and about the artery it doesn't need to be reopened; and above the artery is sprinkled with water of great freshness until the blood is congealed and coagulated; and maybe you will find in what needs to be cauterized or medicinally necessary.
About incision and perforation and wounds and of bloodletting and of plagues and of their similarities.
I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cauterizing is convenient and medical burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterizing; and I have ordered the chapters according to the subordination of the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be alleviated there, then on that which will be demanded.
And then that I begin here, cousin, son, who learns that in this chapter it is to be feared what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that which cousin sees to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated cats are cleared of the evacuation which is with blood in which there is life from the aspersion of the vein or incision on the aposteme or perception of exsituration or purification of the plague or extraction of arrow or incision of rock and their similarities. And all those accompany fear and trembling and in the end of their cats death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the sitting, because some evacuated cases happen to you from manners of men with many manners of maladies. And of them it is clear that they flee from their malady and fear death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find in their malady, and for the length of the malady of theirs, and in the malady is the fear which means death.
And of those it is what gives to your son to have and said, you expect in that sanity, and the following malady is pernicious.
And therefore do not think that you consent to that which sees you from what is this manner; and your caution should be greater than what you consider and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause about it unless with certain scientific knowledge which verifies it, and at which you will perceive successful success.
And use in the cure of all your maladies of prognosis and indication of it, which is converted health, because in that you will be helped about acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this distinct chapter according to the chapters that precede in the chapter of cauterization, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be alleviated what you demand of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
About the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
You know that this malady many evacuated ends in the infants from infancy and when the nurse strengthens the head of the infant with its liveliness.
And some evacuated ends because of a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this malady only in infants; and to all those whom I have seen it, death has been coupled, and thus it is to me a dreadful work in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of it was always magnified until it ceased to support itself because of the greatness of its head, and maybe the humidity increased until it died from heat.
And this humidity is added between the skull and the bone, or is added beneath the bone on the sinciput.
Because the operation in that case the humidity is between the skull and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is convenient that you make a hole in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the aposteme is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner.
And if the humidity is beneath the bone, it seems that you close the commissures of the head, and the water is pressed when you comprehend that in the same manner at the internal parts and it is not hidden from you. You should find three fissures in this manner on the tender spot of the head:
And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with drops and plasters; and then apply something on top for six days, and then dissolve the ligament and cure the plague with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head equally; eat the patient's food in a dry place with little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And it is another manner of incision, which considers how to bring out the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated places are more in the occipicii, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and then attend to the incision until the abscess appears and the water is replenished, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and avoid those flowings of blood and harm the patient through that flux of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter third.
When you encounter catarrh or rheumas in the veins or at the feet, and it is an old thing, and it does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the last resort is the incision of those two arteries.
And then you want to incise those where the patient's vein is located, and then clean the area with an aspersion of drap per so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a certain drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places above the places which are near the aurelles, and they will be hidden until some hours.
And then sew over the artery with a tent, and incise wherever in the spatium of whichever part is needed for an incision to reach the bone, and it will be there for the width of the head.
And if you want, enter the spatium below the artery and turn it towards the incisions in the upper parts.
And it will be the length of the incision about two fingers adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with a pulsating outflow, which will cease before long for a frequent cessation.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you measure from the aurelle the quantity of space of three fingers, and then sew with a tent, and finish until the bone.
And it is necessary to stop the flow of blood which is a quantity of six ounces. and far from getting more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the strength of the patient and the replenishment of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and if something remains on the bone because of a cause of sciatica, then incise that so that an abscess does not form with caution.
And then strengthen the plague with plasters and ligaments of drap of it, and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When you have an old or chronic migraine, due to humid aggravations and quality in the lacertz of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not respond, then we have proceeded to these evil extractions of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those things as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's vein is near the skin which is in the temples; and you will understand the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the sieve-like pulse, and it is hidden only for a few hours due to the vehemence of the flux.
And if it is hidden, then strengthen the neck of the patient with a certain drap; and then clean the area with an aspersion of drap or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatium of which this is the shape: And then you score the codeina in that which is facilitated until you reach the artery; and then get on top of it and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the codeina and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of the entire part.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the oncii, and incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and are counteracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not pour out completely.
And then evacuate six ounces of blood. Between three.
And if the abscess is large, then it is necessary to drain it from two locations with double forceps or tourniquets, and not to touch the putrid matter during the consolidation of the wound and to stop the flow of blood.
Then remove the excess that is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another time.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery instrument within the bone with a cutting cautery instrument until the extremities are severed, and stand in place of that bad work.
And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of complex composition; because cautery is one of those causes that help to finish the humidifying ends, and thus it is better in youth.
And it is necessary to extract the abscesses that occupy the place of the ancient wound, and then place them decently on the pulverized powder, and then be cured with secret medicines that make the flesh and bones strong until they are healthy.
And if meanwhile you are working on another wounded area, then you touch to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that occupies the place of the wound, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the tieu dit on the area until the blood is congealed, and apply the area with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain rests, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And that which is more suitable in the extraction of abscesses is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cutting edges, because you have seized the two areas with tension, and paused somewhat, not much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two areas, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, since they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the edge of the two cutting edges is thus. Perhaps it is better to have a sharp edge with two cutting edges, because if you are skilled with two proper cutting edges, each one makes a cut, and does not tear the flesh quickly.
So when there is some thickness in those areas, it is held by the heat of the fire in those areas and the flesh is separated more easily.
And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
And the space which is between two cutting edges is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies of sharp and acidic ulcers of the eyes.
When the ulcers are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not find any cause for the cure through medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already enrogeses and feels in the front of their walk as if they were walking on ant hills, and the eyes of that one are extinguished, humbled also that already their skin is worn out, and the eyelids are scalped by the acuteness of the tears, the ancient masters have mastered this cure through this operation, and no one has surpassed this cure in space.
And it is that you command the patient to raise the skin which is on the front of their face, and then insert three gauze layers at a distance according to the length of the front. And if the length of the gauze layer falls into two digits: one gauze layer is at a distance according to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the abscesses which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of spongy material prepared or dry cloths that absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it. which is from the partition of the temples into the second incision. Extract all that code which is between two incisions at the siphac which is above the bone, and then do it from the middle incision into the second incision. And then insert the spatula in this primary incision and introduce another instrument called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the side of that sharp part towards the adjacent flesh of the code, and the side of it near the bone, and fill it in until it reaches the middle fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the eyes.
It may be continued to insert a tube into the cisterna, and then make it enter through the middle fissure into another fissure.
Then because of the flow of a certain quantity of blood, express the places of the veins of the congested blood.
And then stop in each cold fissure of the gut, and stop above those swollen veins that are inflamed with poison and oil, and beware that an abscess does not develop from a careless cauterization.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a great abundance of warm water or decoction, and then heal with a mixture of basilicon oil and rose oil, and other things, so that the wounds may be healthy.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending humors from the divisions of the head.
When catarrh comes with continued thickening, and sometimes the humors of the patient are exhausted and small, and already their strength is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of that the skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and consequent extrusion, then you will know through this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins descending from the divisions of the head.
And the best cure for these is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then insert a small tube into one fissure at the middle of the forehead, a little towards the temple (and it begins in the fissure of the left temple going to the right temple; and it is inserted into the bone; and extend your hand through the lacertes of the temples which are numb from mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the fissure with gut or cloth strips. And then strengthen below with swollen veins in poison and oil, so that an abscess does not develop from a careless cauterization.
And when you see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to open the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and then heal with a regiment of desiccative medicine which makes the flesh dry, thus if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an emplaster, and administer it to these wounds on the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the cure of those that fall into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus like iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus like ceze or fava, or it is a fluxible cause thus like water and poison and its similarity, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if sometimes the peyra, then distill it in some oil of violet or sizami, and administer the extraction of it, and make the stirring with a condition, and open the nostrils for the advent of stirring. And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some strips of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the lower parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, subtle of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gesti, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument subtle of few duplications.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of iron and insert the extremity of the canal into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil mollified so that nothing passes except the canal. And then extract with the tieu vent that has strong attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with water that we have recounted.
Perhaps if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared vessel apparatus with which the wings of a small quantity are pressed, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop over that with a decent padding. And then insert that into the tract of the ear facilitated, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will be able to heal that wound so that an abscess or spasm does not develop.
And the manner of healing that wound is that you at the beginning cleanse the patient's vein of septica and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a cesere between your hands and convert the ear to the lower parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear where the greatness of it is premiered. If the fracture of the lunar figure enters into the knee, and the knee is atrabulated, then you can use an appropriate instrument; and apply it to the fracture at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
And if the cause of the swelling in the ear is one of the fatty tissues that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your judgment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form. and administer to that one the excision of that fatty tissue which has fallen into the ear.
And do not hesitate when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and try to extract them with the oncis or gestures subtly, or with a slight incision, as I have said before, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, it is necessary to use sternutation and condition the commencement, and fill the entire ear with a lot of warm liquid, and pour over that ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, be it; and otherwise, then take three or four thin linen cloths according to the length of the finger, and place them in the focus of one of them, and the patient will insert one of them into the hole of their ear and press on one side of that partition and percuss on another side of the ear that is touched. So do not cease to pour water into the ear until all the water has been forgotten.
So do not cease to pour water into the ear until all the water has been forgotten. And now the water will be forgotten, and then you will take pieces of paper or cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the focus until the mucus of it is burned.
And also place another cotton and make as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw that out with a cannula, just as it is said about the extra-auricular ear.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then take it out and give it its semblance, cure it as I have said in the division; but if it is a large thing that causes an apparition at the sense of the vessel, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is put less weighty than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as I have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle oncis, but if no cause appears, then take a strait cannula and draw out widely from which this is the form of it. And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient suffers from the disease; and apply suction to that place with strong force, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your judgment, then operate and close in the circle of the cannula with wax as I have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And make your effusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear through this instrument, of which this is the form. And make that of silver or copper, strait, in which there is a small hole, and placed thus.
And so it will be as they employ to make the container of the cannula, which will be necessary here. And if you wish, take the radiancy and envelop it decently in the extremity of the container, and apply a gentle oil in the concavity of the ausiment, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the radiancy with warmth and express your hand on it so that the compression is tempered until the oil is expelled from the concavity of the ausiment and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And what has been poured into the ear is already scaled in a small focus. And beware that the cause which you distilled into the ear is not too frequent, because ear medicines do not suffer from it.
This appears to be a chapter or section title, likely indicating the end of a particular section or chapter in the medieval medical treatise.
Of the cure of obstructions of ears.
Some turns of certain infants are born with obstruction of the ears, not perforated, and that already happens in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a wound or flesh in it; and this obstruction some turns is made in the pregrowth of the ear canal which does not conduct the vessel, and some turns are in the foreparts.
And that which occurs in the patient's chest, which does not comprehend the exertion, is among the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that which follows the exertion, it is necessary that you pause the patient's ear at the sun and gaze into it. And thus if an apparent opacity occurs, observe carefully the subtle aspect of which this is the form of it:
If the extremity of it is in which a small latitude is found, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the aspect should be of two equal leons so that it does not cause lassitude to the ear.
And thus if the opacity is born from flesh in the ear or in the middle of it, then you examine subtle and incisive violent facilitating entries so that all the flesh is restored.
And if the opacity is in the chest of the ear, then take a subtle leon's ray and focus that fire on a small area, and then place it in the middle of the ear.
And thus if you have felt the opacity in that which the patient attracts and facilitates, due to the gravity of hearing, it is necessary to remove the oppression of it, and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then stop in the ear a drap of oil according to the quantity of the width of the trauc which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a vessel, pulverize over the affected area and use it; and if the ear has already been infected, then it is necessary that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in cerate so that it is well-roasted, until the apostema is thoroughly cleansed; and then heal it until it is healthy.
Maybe if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause over the ear, and use another cure that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the cure of atrophy which occurs in the eyelids.
Atrophy which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes it comes with humidity, some humidities are dry.
Then it is necessary that you hold those with tender touch or with a pointed instrument, and examine those with aspect of their roots, and then pause over the affected areas.
Maybe if pain comes with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with a subtle, circular cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and humidities back to their roots when some cause remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Humidities gather in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled into cataract in its strength and hardness, and thus cataract is called.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the lower eyelid and underneath.
Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the cataract is proceeding from it in that which appears on the eyelid and is obscured throughout the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make a fissure above it for the width, and then scrape off that entire part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with a pointed instrument and detach it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the cataract is declining to the internal parts of the eyelid from the internal surface, then you raise the eyelid and suspend the cataract with a pointed instrument, or you indicate an incision, and press on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, that does not hurt for any cause.
And then make the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and cure the area with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the cure of abscesses in the lower eyelid of the eye.
Abscesses are ulcers which are engendered in the membranes of the lower eyelid, and they increase among children, aggravate the eyes of those who have them, and cause them to lose the clarity of vision due to which they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun.
And thus you often find them talking about their eyes being weak for a long time, and about their eyes sleeping; and so the lower eyelids are humid, which have already covered inflammation, and the imminence of apparent abscess is in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel an abscess until it reaches them.
In some manner of operation it is in that the patient pauses to put their head on the tie, and then puts a cloth of linen and of water, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains a certain amount of all parts, and then puts that over that and presses with the fingers of the whole foot so that there may be added an arc in the middle of the circle, and then feels in the middle of that humidity an incident fissure for the latitude, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure which is made in flebotomy.
Perhaps in the preceding cavity that you find the entire code within, so that you may reach an arch according to the process of white greyish-colored scars.
Then extract that humors which you have enveloped between the fingers of both hands, from the forepart to the back, revolving between the right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that the spatium does not reach the vein and descend to that place.
Perhaps if your arch does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, perhaps you adjust in the fissure a small facilitated hammer to process the arch; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of linen in water and wine and place them over the area and strengthen those hammers.
And thus you will find salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
And then heal that until it is healthy.
Perhaps if you find a posthumous abscess, then cure that with emplasters of cedails until it is healthy.
Chapter 11.
On the methods of touching the vein.
When in the eyelids of the veins there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those affect the vein and cause methods of maladies such as assiduous tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until that is the cause of destruction of the vein which is called touching of the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or by acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or by making incisions and sutures; or by canning as you will be directed.
And then it is necessary that you pause the head of the patient on the tie; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, good; and if not, insert a needle in the place where there is faith in the part beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from below, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where there are no veins — near the veins, and pull the faith to the upper parts beneath the eyelid, and convert that into a ray.
And then feel in the part behind the eyelid beneath the adjusted veins with a spatium incident of the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal; and then extract the faith and place beneath the eyelid small soft cotton pads or cloths, and then apply a bandage over the eyelid with tension, and it is thus like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Perhaps it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because then it has diversified in men, because of those it is indicated that there should be inserted into the large eyelid a great quantity according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then feel with the spatium over the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural veins, thus like the grossness of the king.
And then put the onion on one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with the scalpel the two labia at the gulf or faith of subtle wool, and abstergize the blood, and make adhere what superfluously flows from the faiths over the two eyebrows for some envisioning causes, if you want to do that, and if not, do not cure.
And then leave the suture of the faiths for three or four days, and then cure that.
And if you want, leave the plague with its suture, and cure that with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the plague and the aggregation of it; perhaps the suture is better. Therefore, I have thus described the ancient taxes.
Perhaps it is necessary to solicit about the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
And it is another manner in taxation, and it is that you mark on the eyelid figure thus like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and conjoined inches according to this form:
Perhaps if it is not possible to have the inches, and that is not engulated, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other faith near the larger lacrimal, and the faith according to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the fingers of both hands the faiths with equality, and then elevate your hand with elevation engulated, elevate the entire code over which there is marked thus as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound in a suture, and heal that interior which was infected.
Perhaps you should apply a poultice to your swelling or your fracture, but that poultice is with wax and it resembles, and it is enveloping.
And some vegetables are applied to the eyelid that converts the evil humors, therefore it is seen that you use them in that of water which we have said about swelling; maybe a suture in some cases is more artificial.
To prepare medicines according to this method: and it is that you convert the eyelid and disperse the figure which is deduced according to what has been recounted; and then through artful craft make two canals or two subtle channels of those whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs being less than the latitude of the spatium. And you have already cut into the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add certain subtle things under the fluid that superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the canals of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and leave it there for some days, because the cord will be structured by the dead skin and will be rejected and will be purged until it is seen to fall away.
Perhaps it is delayed, then prick the flesh with the troyras, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Since it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
And this is the method of making two canals which you will do according to this form: and take into account the quantity of the length and of the latitude, neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
About the elevation of punctured skin in the wheel when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and punctures the wheels, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that subtle vein of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and knot them in a very subtle manner. And it is the length of the veins of the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle vein below it briefly, and knot the extremities of that if you want.
And then stop the evil that has seized the head of the thigh, and it is proper to illuminate with sunlight so that your work may be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has needed to be engendered, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract that from under the natural skin.
And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into the mixture, and be the skin one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand into that until the skin is separated from the mixture in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Perhaps it is stuck to the mixture and the skin does not go, you will stick the mixture to the parts below with the vein which you have composed in that, until it is stuck to the mixture of the entire superior tree.
And look at that in the vision of the wheel, because then you will remove the mixture and the vein, and grasp something and close the wheel, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its proper place and is born over that good flesh.
And if the skin is too brief, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated with that, or until it releases until it is aligned properly to some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of extracting the humor which is seen in the eyelid underneath.
When it is in the wheel of extracting humor, and it is counteraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in itself, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or of sections or of cauterization, and it is called leprosy, and this extraction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of wounds or of sections or of cauterization, or for resemblance to their bad curings.
There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where it is between them a certain measure of fabric of linen, and tie them together until they are healed.
And do not think that you use the cure of it from the causes which are exhausted, constraining; because if you do that, it returns to extracting humor worse than ever before.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugrec, and imbue the water in which are mixed altaea and sesame of linen, or engulphed diyaquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge it in that measure, and cure with that.
The treasure of your healing art is that you should thoroughly cleanse every wound so it does not consolidate according to the method you focus on at the beginning.
And in this operation that we have mentioned, it is not but some rectification of the dislocated joints that do not return to their proper form according to the focus underneath.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of dislocation which is made in the eyelid below.
This dislocation which is made in the eyelid below, which is properly named vertadera; and it is of two kinds, natural and accidental.
The accidental one is made by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle and make it double-threaded, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates both extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the skin to the parts above with the needle and sew it on with the needle, and insert it into the spatium in an ample space. And then the figure of the eyelid returns to its proper shape; if not, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that you convert the eyelid, and make two fissures in the side of the lower eyelid.
And there are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and it is from their made angle that when they meet, the figure of theirs is made.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh there for the quantity that is the width of the lower eyelid, which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then heal those with what we have said about mollifying medicines and poultices, until they are healthy.
And if the dislocation is due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been mentioned. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of dislocation when it is above or below, which runs in the operation, according to the preparation of the form of dislocation, and that is in various diverse forms.
And the skilled artisans prepare everything in every possible way to make it possible for the patient to return to their natural form, or near it, and that injury according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many ways so that the eyelid is solidly attached above to the album of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it in its place, or stretch it with a hook.
And then you make the adhesion in a subtle spatium, which is not acute from the incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the injury is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatium remains without hurting the eye in its acuity.
And it is your incision that excavates that adhesion in order to facilitate the return of the eyelid to its natural form and so that the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salt water which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and place on the eye a flax thread infused in album of egg, and then use it for three days with causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
About the incision of the nail and prominence of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
You know that the nail is according to two manners, either it is nervous, and similar to a subtle dry cipher; or it is non-nervous, similar to a white congested humidity, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take hold of the onychia, it is absorbed and the onychia does not fix itself in it.
And both species do not begin except from the major lacrimal gland until it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
The manner of operating in the incision of it is that the injury pauses the sieve cap in the tieu seat, and then operates on the eyes of it, and elevates the eyelid with its hand, and then collects the nail from the onychia of little double duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into the nail of a horse or an ox or a cow, or similar things, or a strong thread, or double the extremity of the small needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with the thread; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excavate the skin around the edge of the nail which closes the pupil. And thus you should apply that ointment to the skin between their buttocks.
Then you should insert the rhizome into the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and let the flesh of the tear duct return to its natural state so that an influx of continuous tears is not hindered.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has a crack, thus we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's claw spatula, from which this is its shape.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and that it does not break into the rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then make an incision in the vein with a little trituration of salt or of clear wine, and let it be until another day; and then take care that the water which flows in is cleansed so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed on the sole of the foot, then many times this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus, as I have described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to make an incision in that, then open the vein of the patient and take a subtle lion's claw spatula sharpened according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and congealed and takes root in that vein, then distill from your work in the vein with clear wine or pure rose water or salt trituration, and open the vein until another day.
And then iterate over that operation until all that is of it is removed, lest the contrary happen and an abscess form in the vein, because then you will leave that, and take care at the beginning to remove the abscess so that it may be healed.
And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healthy.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if you note it in the vein for great annoyance, should be suspended on the sole; and make an incision into that part, and do not ultimately make an incision so that influxes of tears are not hindered.
And then distill in the tear duct pure rose water and clear wine until it is healthy.
Chapter 17.
On the incision of the gouty and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the vein.
Sometimes in the veins of some people is born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to compress the eyelids against the parts before and is assembled like a rose of balcony.
The operation in this case is that the patient holds his head back in the chair; and then open the veins of that and collect all that flesh on the sole conveniently adapted to that, and take it with a forceps or with a basket; and then make an incision into the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the encision, and beware of the vein that does not allow your operation to be deceived.
And it is your incision in which you make those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps that collect carefully according to what will be the form of it, as we will explain in this chapter.
When your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the vein with salt trituration, or distill in the red powder and similarly to the corrosive medicines, and place it over the vein beforehand covered with album of wool until it is assured against abscess.
And if some cause of gout is senhoragated with holy remedy, and fears abscess, then leave the vein and take care of that abscess in water that will expel that abscess, and then iterate over that operation until it is healthy, and similarly do to the adjusted flesh that accides in the vein of this species.
You will see that I cover all the cures of the vein freely by natural way or by accidental way, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of wisdom in the vein.
Wisdom comes from veins that are tested on the vein and prohibits the vessiment of its operation, and develops the vein in longitude of days.
Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the vein in which there is wisdom is strong and in it there is no other malady than wisdom, then you collect that wisdom.
And it is that you command the patient to hold his head back in the chair, and then suspend those veins on an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form.
or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
And then you should bind those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and remove the blood hour by hour, until those veins are emptied of their fluid and then you will be relieved.
And beware that you do not let the fluid flow into the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is during midday in the sunlight, and be very firm in your operation so that nothing seeps in except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill the fluid into a clear green or red liquid so that it will acquire the corrosive quality that is removed from the sap.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it at that hour, then apply all of it so that it relieves the pain of it, and let it be for several days until the pain of it is calmed and ensured against putrid aposteme.
And then iterate over it according to the method that will bring about healing, until it is healthy.
And this is the form of the remedies:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute medicine that is preceded by the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it except that you operate on the aposteme, removing all the humidity which is in it, until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and sometimes it is corrupted or blackened, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named a rough head, and it should be made of iron indeed, and it should have a rounded end thus as to make points for puncturing lime or alkali salts by subtle puncture (thus as it is in the following form).
And stop that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve it among the fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is reduced.
And then some evacuations will be made, and then restore the place with causes of desiccative and styptic remedies.
Then if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and is absolved from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostemated and does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not engendered except to reduce the fissure in the form of the nose, and according to this method: and it is that you discover by second bone or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribulations according to this form:
It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and the rod of it should be first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then stop that on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little of the fluid, and then revolve your hand with the tribulation until it penetrates all of the bone, and that feels the patient for so long as it is necessary to have a good outcome.
Then restore the place with styptic medicines that dry thus as you are experienced in it.
Then as the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which flowed out to the affected parts beforehand returns to its natural state, so that is why it is easier to cure the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the fluid.
When the fluid eminates in its totality and does not fall into numbness or diminution, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient, and then to follow, and then to stop the veins in the cervical scarifications and suck for good suction; and then to stop on the fluid with a liniment made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then to strengthen the emplaster over the fluid with many poultices.
And the method of the poultices is that you take many layers of lime and many roots, and each layer should be duplicated in four places; and make it from those roots.
And then stop those one on top of the other according to the quantity of which the fluid has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the veins with suction and scarifications; and then stop the veins and let the fluid flow freely during the day and night.
But if the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very straight.
And then stop the ligament during the day and night thus as we have said.
And if the fluid has already been reduced, well and good, and otherwise, then iterate the emplaster with poultices and structure and veins until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
When you make an incision in the tunicate vein, and then it is prominent and proceeds outward to the eyelids thus as a grain of radish, and its form is like a home for that, and you want to incise, then the operation is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the vein of the lower part below in the upper part, and then put another needle in which it is double-threaded from the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and let the first needle follow its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift it to that part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that much.
And then extract the thorn and place it on the swollen vein that has become inflamed from the humor, and let the bad blood flow out through the filament in the grape.
Then treat the vein in this way so that it comforts what is inside, until the wound becomes healthy.
Some remedies are added to the entire affected area in a circle of cloth around the vein, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that reaches the root of the vein, and the albuginous humidity is corrected, and the vein is descended and enters thus.
And then strengthen it until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This illness that is called ulcer does not exist, but rather it is a sane vein that is adjusted like descending water and not the other.
The way to operate on it is that you make the ulcerative sore settle on the prepared and straightened skin, and then take the dry cloth in your hands more than two parts and grasp it so that you see the sane vein penetrating into the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and its light is stopped, and the ulcer sees the causes thus as it was.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
But if the descent to the sane vein in the water that we have said is not prepared, then make the ulcerative sore settle between your hands and take a subtle spatula and pierce it above the panicle surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunic (in the place you see), so that the sane vein is forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, then you distill the vein's water that falls into the one in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it is treated for other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of the water descending from the vein.
We have already said the species of the water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with a declarative sermon, then that follows according to the sanity.
Then it is necessary that you make settle the ulcer between your hands over a hot stone and bind it with a very tight knot.
And then pause near the eyelid of your left vein, if the vein in which is the water is the left vein; or with your right hand, if the vein is on the right.
And then take with your right hand the emetic, if the vein is on the left; or with your left hand, if the vein is on the right.
And then pause the extremity of the emetic near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the album of the vein on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then inject the emetic into the vertex and revolve your hand in that.
And then penetrate into the album of the vein and feel that the emetic has already arrived at the cause, seen clearly.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the emetic be at the point of the measure of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the vein; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the vein through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause the emetic into the place where the water is, and then you will draw it down below once again, and so if the water descends thus, then you will see the ulcer above which the vein has its sight thus, and the emetic in the vein.
And then rest for a little while; so if the water has descended, then you will pause again before the emetic is touched.
And then when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the emetic with facility, and revolve it a little with your hand, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and in that wash the vein deeply; and then pause outside the vein, stopping or anointing with oil rosated and album of Huou and ligature around that vein.
But we and those who are from our time pause upon that comment written in the album of Huou.
And if you do not obey your emetic through the instrument of the vein for its hardness — because it is a piece of the homes from which the vein is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula named Alberid, from which this is the form:
And then pierce with it at that conjunction, and do not extend your hand in the trajectory, and it is not so that you make a way to the emetic in a subtle place.
And then introduce the emetic according to what we have said.
And receive the compliment of your work, be prepared to treat the ulcerative sore that descends quietly on the left back in a dark mansion, and be prohibited from all movements.
And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is lined up, and do not move the left head to the right or left part of anything.
And it be the ligament according to its disposition within three days.
And then detach it from that dark and gloomy place, and make the veins clear, and then return the ligament within seven days.
And do not cover what you do at the time of the treatments or almost then apply the infusion. Having covered that you remove it for so long as the water flows strongly and vehemently in great abundance.
Perhaps it happens that an abscess forms slowly, then cover it so that you detach the vein within seven days, and correct what was there before the abscess.
Then you release the sight of it and pause on the face of its orifice, for which it is ruled by the evacuation of it, which exists in the dark and gloomy place for some days.
And then it will be extracted from that dark and gloomy place gradually and converted into its causes.
And you know that in this case it is not excused to neglect some details of vision, and then you will be careful about the operation.
And now it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayrag mine, which is perforated, and the water succeeded.
Perhaps emperor, you have not seen it in our land which has perfected that, nor is it legitimate in some of the books of the ancient ones; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of mine for which it is above those, that one who ignores those.
And they are made of iron or of their own proper iron, and they are the extremities of their arm at this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
About the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted to which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a many-footed polyp; and this evil is called polyp because it has a resemblance to that foot represented. And of it is flesh cancerous, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not flesh of lion-like color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover what you do with the evil disease seething between your hands and place it in the sun, and warm the nostrils of it, and prick the tender spot once in those flesh. And then extract it from the parts beforehand, and then incise what you have comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part within which you know that all the flesh is already ostensible; if there remains any cause from which the abscess is possible, then you will find what is one of the subtle instruments facilitated within so that none of them remain. Perhaps it is a lordship of blood or an abscess forming slowly, then you pause at what covers; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize that within so that it be absolved soundly and all the cavities are opened.
And then it will be cut in the nose, then the incision is made with agreement of water or wine. Perhaps the nose is opened and of it processes humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate as it covers, then you know that it is flesh wounded in the purulent bones of the nostrils which have not been reached by abscess.
Therefore then it covers that you insert a thread of the wing to which some grossness is, and anoint the foot in the same quantity of the digit or month, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or hand, and engender the evil and insert one extremity of the wing in the nostrils with the ray or with another cause that is possible.
And then it will be done, that the sieve odorament is inserted so that it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and it is situated over the sieve of gold, because many details seem similar to this action, and it is a legitimate cause for one who wants to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the wing, one extremity that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer serrature of flesh with the nails that are on the wing, and do it within so that you know that the flesh is already on the nails of the wing.
And then extract the wing, and pause in the nose according to the abstraction of the blood one caliber, and do it for three days or more until all that is corroded is removed from the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Perhaps it is a method of treatment that is exhausted, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a cupping device which does distill oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And if you make a poultice of silver or copper, which resembles a small lantern opened up, and also a small cup, the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the curved end of the instrument is flat, uncovered; at which handle is in the rear of it, with which you hold that which you want to suck out of the oil or that which you want from the succulent juices.
Chapter 25.
They are born naturally at the ends of the nose.
Moist masses are born naturally at the ends of the nose, and they are magnificent and honored in those days during which a lot is expected from their regard.
And through that hole you inject that at the beginning of its appearance, and you inherit all of it. And then stop over the area with a cautery or burning medicine which was in place of it.
But if the injection is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it has become putrid, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that iron quart which is an aposteme of cancer; because moist masses are injected to that which develops this great malice over that which it had.
And if the aposteme is of a fiery touch and not of dark color, and it seems that injection is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and inject without fear, and cure the area with water that exits and constrains until it is healthy.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or resemblance.
You know that when you make a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer benefits in that operation unless in some homes.
Therefore, when you finally reach some cause of those, you consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and then you care for that until it is healthy.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is certain that you extract each part of its apparent coding until it is holy. And then you adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and on them sprinkle holy dragon's powder and three times, and place over the powder a piece of diafinicon emplaster, or some other of the consolidated emplasters, and leave it like that for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another emplaster, and leave it until the ulcers are abolished, and then you care for it with an ointment until it is healthy.
But the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with threads as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with a fiber as you and I have known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Moist masses finally reach some homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes hard resembling fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you convert the lips and find each of those hardnesses of the whole part, and then you absolve and fill the place with holy three times, and then it is washed with a gentle agreement and the area is cared for with water that is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
About the injection of adjusted flesh in the gums.
A great many masses are born over the adjusted flesh of the gum, which the ancient doctors called albules, therefore it is certain that you suspend that with an onion or hold it with forceps and inject it into its roots, and let the healthy blood flow or the holy.
And then stop over the place with holy three times or other stipulated powders or excitatives.
And if that flesh returns, then inject it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the root of iron teeth.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums, there are scabs, ulcers, and some masses are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by that and the teeth are ulcerated.
So then you should prepare the patient by placing them between your knees and placing their head on your thigh, and gently feel with your fingers for those areas that appear to be affected and causing similar symptoms, so as not to omit any cause, and that is why there are signs of darkness and citrinitat and other mondified things.
So if it is stated that this is in those of the beginning of the reason, well; and if not, then you will iterate the reason over these on another day and the second and the third until you come to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that the fingers have needed various motions and diverse figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for that reason the instrument is prepared which the finger is sharpened for the partition of the teeth, another instrument is sharpened between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of instruments are thus prepared as you will see soon.
Chapter xxx.
On the eradication of teeth.
Because you should cure the tooth of its pain in all entirety and tardiness in total eradication of it, since there is no cause that would surpass the void left when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance within which it is excavated in the eradication of it.
Moreover, when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you should firmly be certain which is the aching tooth, because many voids relieve the pain and convince the patient that it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and aching tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
So when you are certain which is the aching tooth, and you know well, then it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the entire partition, and then mauk those tie-ups, or make subtle forfices at the small beginning little by little until that concudes.
And then apply a strong force with large tenaculas for good loquacious or sturdy fortification, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that you hold them in such a way that they do not move, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so that it does not tremble, nor will the patient have major pain.
And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the entire part to facilitate and strengthen the removal of it, thus it is done at the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of that extract and strengthen those extremities of the root subtly so that it is not trapped during your construction over that with tenaculas.
And it is necessary that you operate with exquisite care in the scraping of the entire part of the gum and guard much your strength so that it does not tremble and remains partitioned from it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what foolish ignorant barbers do in their obstinacy and audacity over the eradication of them, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many voids come about the bad and great maladies which are more difficult to be trapped, and the roots of them remain entirely or some of those, or that you extract from the osses of the mandible thus as many voids have testified.
And then the eradication of it is washed with mouthwater, either with warm or agreeable salt.
And if there are fluxes of blood for that, thus as many voids have fluxes, then scatter some quantity of wax and asperties over the wound, and if it does not confer that wax, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle tenaculas are those which have grasped the tooth at the beginning with a long extraction, of brief manipulation and gross, so that they are not doubled when you need to operate with those.
And thus as many times of gross manipulation until when you have grasped them with those they are not doubled, they are brief extractions.
And they are made of Indian iron artfully made with extracted extractions, and in the extractions of those there are teeth which some enter into others and grasp for sturdy construction, strongly fortified, and some voids of those extractions are in the form of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter xxix.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of the osses from the trapped mandibles.
When you need the eradication of a tooth which is trapped for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause over the affected area with a border for one day or two until the area is mollified; and then insert the instrument or tenaculas into the extractions which are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guarantee, in the form of forceps.
The external remedies of their pain are made this way with lime or alum.
And if they do not obey you with these forceps or tenaculas, then it is necessary to operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has an atlas-like name, so it is a small lever of which the shape is this.
It should be a short, thick extremity, and not be bent so that it does not get in the way.
Then if the root is perforated, well; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity with some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two slants of which this is the form, suitable for the following. and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled onto a large hook, and this is the form.
of the triangular extremity curved or short, which has some thickness, and not bent so that it does not get in the way.
And you will know that the instruments for teeth are moved similarly and likewise the other instruments.
The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the matter according to what it signifies, and the various illnesses; because they are among the illnesses for which the ancients did not describe or pause to use a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if it is obstructed by the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if they are weak, then it must be carefully treated on that spot in its proper place, where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with a gesture of which this is the form.
And it should be with some small thickness, little by little, and be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is perforated; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to what is convenient.
But if there is small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape away that putrefaction and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in that form, and especially when they grow towards the women, and especially towards the venerable elderly; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not in proportion to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or smooth it out, then extract it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you will cut it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's mouth, and made of Indian iron of extremely sharp extremity.
And it should be your incision in which you cut it into three days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not touch another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to lime, then lime it with lime of Indian iron of which this is the form.
And it should be all of Indian iron and its marginal essence; and it should be of very fine points thus with lime as they are made into needles, thus the tooth is limed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is touched and harmed. And then bind it together in the fig tree, and scrape it with the razor's edge.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is obstructed and hinders the tongue, then it is necessary that you file it until the aspersion of that fraction is stopped and enclosed, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not lead or the speech does not corrupt.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold foil or silver.
When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal through percussion or shock, and the patient cannot strengthen on what they eat, and you have treated it with medicines of stringent nature, and your treatment has not been successful, then so that it does not fall into those which are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver becomes greenish and is soon worn out in a few days, but gold never loses its value.
And it should be the gold foil in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosity of the gold foil between two decayed ones, or one or more, until it reaches the fabric of the healthy tooth on the other side. And then iterate the treatment until the part of which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not decayed.
And your constriction is the one that strengthens the weakness of the teeth roots that do not escape.
Then remove the superfluous roots of the tooth with forceps or tongs, and add them to each place in gestures, and convert them into occultations between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not cause lesions on the tongue. Then let it be treated thus, strongly with a Roman remedy.
Perhaps it is dislocated or bruised, strengthen that or those in another tooth in such a manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of two healthy teeth and of two decayed ones, thus as it happens to be bound together.
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their placement in their respective places, and are reattached thus as we have recounted, and remain there.
And do not do this unless you are skilled artisans and wise.
And some remedies are adapted to certain causes of cow's bones, and it is done in the form of a tooth, and it is paused in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter thirty-four.
About the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which is beneath the tongue has some remedies or is naturally in that which men deny, or accidentally and suddenly happens due to a plague which has already been consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, the seventh head existing in the tier; and elevate the seventh tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Perhaps in that there is some hardness or induration, and it has been established by consolidation of plague, then you cut with an unción and divide that according to the latitude until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
And beware that there is not made a fissure in the prism of the flesh and that you do not cut here with an archer's bow and vein flux of blood.
And then wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or vinegar or cool water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licini; thus it is the means by which you hold the patient beneath the tongue in any novelty so that it does not consolidate another remedy.
Perhaps it happens to have a flux of blood, pause over the vitriolic place thrice; perhaps if the blood flows, then cauterize the place with a cautery lantern that is convenient for this. And then cure it in the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter thirty-five.
On the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Some remedies happen beneath the tongue, an aposteme similar to a small swelling, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you break open the mouth of the patient, sitting before a candle and considering the aposteme.
And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that place where it is cancer.
And if it is declining to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguillon in it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and incise the entire partition; and if blood flows during your operation, then pause for three hours, thus it is vitriolic, until the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have treated it completely, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that with another cure suitable for this until it is healthy.
Chapter thirty-six.
On the extraction of an aposteme from two auricles and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of other apostemes.
When it happens in the gullet, then they are glands which are assembled together, which happen before and are named two auricles, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healthy, then consider if the aposteme is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; beforehand let it mature until it is ripe, and then you can operate on it, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, radish, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, during your operation, if it has already rested the aposteme of it cautiously with complete rest or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit in the sunlight, and the head of it should be in the tier, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue beneath an instrument most noble of which this is the form.
Let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Then, as you press upon the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you see above that same vein, then take nine and place it in the amulet, and pull it to the divided parts beforehand as much as you can. Another thing that you remove some cause from the tunics, and then cut into the instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you remove some cause from the tunics, and then cut into the instrument of which this is the shape: and it is assembled into forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the interior of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed, well-forged.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut into the spatula of which this is the shape of it: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And since you have cut into a nail, cut the other according to this same method of cutting, and then apply the cutting to the patient's affected area with cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, apply cold water of decoction of sage or mint leaves and similarly to that of the stopping causes so that the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
And some vegetables, namely onions, in the gourd have other abscesses like those two auricles, and cut them according to what you did and said in the cutting of the two nails simultaneously.
And you had medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in the gourd of it, the abscess which tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had already closed the gourd of it, and the woman breathed with great strain, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was about to die if perhaps something stood for a day or two.
And the abscess had so grown that it had formed two ramps within which it had passed through two tracts.
Then you examine it carefully and place it in one of their corners, and pull it out, and it is attached to the large portion, and then you cut into that which comprehends the other tract, and then you open its mouth, and comprehend its tongue, and then you place the corner in that abscess.
And then you remove a large part of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood. Then the gourd of that woman was absolutely cured, and she began to drink water, and then took some food, so you did not cease to cut into that abscess many times for a long time, and the abscess succeeded in place of that, which was prolonged until it was finished.
Then you should not touch and cauterize the gourd of it, then stop adding; and then you walked and did not know that God did that good thing for me.
Chapter 38.
On the cutting of a vein when it is abscessed.
When the vein is cut at the bottom, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with that which we have said in the division, and your cure does not conform to it, and sometimes it happens that the abscess is cauterized because it has stayed there and is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut into that which is aggregated round; and if it is of long duration, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and it is not in its natural state, then it is necessary that you attempt the cutting of it, because there is fear about the patient.
And when you sometimes do it according to the method that you have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient seize the tongue with an instrument of which proceeds the shape and then place the corner in the new one, and pull it down and cut into it with one of the two instruments which are said in the cutting of the two nails.
And it is necessary that you do not cut into it except what is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you cut into it more, you will delay the healing process.
And then cutting, use that which we have recommended in the cutting of the two nails, and cure it until it is healthy.
But if the patient is frightened by the cutting of it, then use gentleness in the cauterization of it, and the method of cauterizing it is not just with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the vein, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and conform to that vital cause, and stop that neither in space nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
It is the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed as well as the concavity of a vessel of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the mouth, and the patient spits above the vein, so that it corrodes saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not flow out from the gourd of it and that it descends to that.
And then you take your hand in medicine, and express that on the uvula for a space of half an hour until it is digested and settled by the bite of medicine.
And if you want, take a thread and wrap it around the extremity of the vein, and submerge the thread in medicine, and insert the vein with the thread into a canal above until the thread adheres to that canal, and make as many turns as needed until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the vein, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization is abstracted in the circuit of the vein with thread wrapped around it, and modify what is in the circuit of the vein from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and be cured beforehand by embrocation, and give up guarismes until it is healthy.
And this species of cure is more salvaged than incision and longer in terms of fear.
Some wounded eyes are cured with what is more subtle than cautery and incision, because they are cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of theirs, into a bowl, and they are submerged in good wine, and boiled; and the bowl is well-washed decently, and it is in the middle of the bowl a tunnel, above which an instrument conquering of iron according to this manner; be made of silver or iron.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula over the vein, until the uvula is moderately fumigated.
And then iterate over those many wounded places until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the arrival of abscesses, because it would adjust too much in the abscess, and do not believe that you make it, but rather obtain the declaration of abscess from the cautery of the doctor.
But if it is not present to you this instrument, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the one closed by a hood, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the hood of the cane prohibits the vapor from reaching the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the gullet and other causes.
Many wounded places adhere to the gullet or thorn of feet or some other cause.
Then you will extract what is apparent from those things, above which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone and solitary, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you will make the patient vomit by giving him a drink of deglutition in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forgotten by vomiting; or that he swallows a piece of raw onion or radish or a dry bread roll; or take a piece of dried seaweed sponge, and tie it strongly with thread, and then make the patient transglutinate that, so that when you perceive the place where the thorns are extracted, then they will be forgotten. And take an eel and bind it with thread, and make a table and prepare it to be extracted; or take a porpoise and prepare the joints and prepare them to be drawn out.
But if it is not forgotten in those causes which we have discussed, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is more gross than a small vein, and in the extremity of the vein is conquered what you insert into its throat with facility.
And the old wise head is elevated above them, and beware that the touch of the wise bones of the throat, so that it does not bend to the body and what pierces the bone or thorn, or that which the doctor puts in his hand.
But I think that the patient who inserts it is wise, because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pierces within, and draws his hand with the instrument above, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forgotten.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood congealed and annexed to the throat.
When blood congealed is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure by medicines and not comforts, then consider that in the throat of the patient alone, because you have comprehended the tongue of the patient with an instrument which you have recommended.
Then if you find the blood congealed, extract it with a small onion or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a pause in the concavity of the cannula with an ignited iron, and make as many turns (until the blood congealed is dead and comes out of the throat) and abstain from giving the patient water for a whole day.
And then take a full pitcher of cold water, and place the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it for an hour or two, lest the blood be too agitated, for the blood is very sensitive to changes in temperature.
Perhaps it is not forgotten that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cumin or aniseed instruments which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do it thus, for it will be a four-day treatment.
And it is another manner of operating in the fumigation of that, that you take a small tube in which there are ignited coals and the tube is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a tube; and then place underneath the fumigation; and hold the patient's mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood, for the blood very quickly perceives it.
And if it does not help, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give them salty and warm foods, and do not give them water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the blood of the gouty patient is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it has some curvature: which is placed on the gouty patient, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which holds, in which there is a small hole, so that, when it compresses some cause, that does not leave.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs for two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their measure; and for that which comprehends the humidities.
And the second manner is for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess on the head is different from an abscess on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them requires judgment for operation.
And many abscesses are those which require that they not be perforated but rather matured by the healthy action in them or completion of theirs.
Some abscesses require that they be punctured when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints, because an abscess when it reaches a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is mature, you will harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore puncture what has not matured, due to incomplete digestion, but only what is near the buttocks, so that you do not corrupt its process and it becomes elongated into the internal parts of the buttocks, and becomes a fistula, or it becomes an issue in the term of it that is not healthy. You must know the time for puncturing the abscess, and thus it is when it is matured.
And you know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the decrease of fever, and also the diminution of redness and of pulse, and the acute point of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And therefore you must know how to puncture carefully in the place where the pus is beneath the abscess and comes out for cure of the prominence.
And puncturing is sometimes for the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in places of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay the puncturing of it until the digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; because if you puncture it then, it is prolonged by the corruption of the pus and of much foulness, and therefore the lips of it become hardened and the depth of it.
Some abscesses are punctured according to the latitude of the flesh or body which needs the necessity, or according to what the member itself indicates.
And you know that you must administer small punctures, and in large abscesses a large and wide puncture or many sections according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
And other times because of the apostemas that cover the codeina, it is understood and enclosed, when it is made thus, that pain and fatigue are in terms, as if already established, thus like that which accumulates in drops and bubbles.
And of those that are inserted in the section having three angles; and of those that are in the quality that is inserted thus like a figure of a leaf of myrrh, thus like the apostemas of the ankles.
And of theirs in which round and lunar sections are administered, and similarly to those.
Maybe that one which is not able thus as are superficial apostemas of lions, covering that you perforate that with a superficial perforation, or simply so little.
And covering how large the apostema is and has collected much healthy matter, that you perforate it and do not think to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted from it a part, and then open the apostema another day, and then extract a larger part, and then make those matters well-gradated until they are fully evacuated.
And mainly if the patient is of green complexion, or pregnant woman, or small child, or very decrepit, because the animal spirit matters are resolved at the exit of the healthy matter, and strengthens their morale, and you open them.
Do not keep this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these apostemas, covering that you cleanse the wounds and consider thus if the wound of the apostema is small, or is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of oil or of antidote; and if the apostema is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then cover that you pause in some trench until they converge together.
And if in the apostema a part of the codeina is abscessed or has concaved into the circuit, then cover that you complete it with very good oil or with thread made of cloth of linen, thus as when one has treated wounds or roots, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to cure what covers the joints until they are sanitized.
Maybe if you accumulate flux of blood during the hour of your operation, then administer cold water and wine in which you mix a cloth of linen, and place that over the area of the flux of the blood, well-gradated.
Maybe if you persist in the flux of blood, then cover that you administer regimen and cure, and powder those which are recommended in many places of our book and division.
Maybe if it is in winter time, and the place of the apostema is a place of many nerves, then cover that you put powders in wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then cover that you pause powders mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, thus as we have said, and then cover that you dissolve the apostema and cleanse it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
And thus it is necessary to know the cure of apostemas universally, maybe according to the way of distinction already said about each apostema in which manner it is the way of curing it by chapters singularly.
Chapter 41.
On the sections of apostemas that come in the codeina of the head.
In the codeina of the small head, little apostemas, and some species of nodes that contain tunics that are to their fact; and those species are many.
And they are pungent, and of those that contain humidity similar to lime. And of those that contain humidity similar to pores, and resemble them; and of those that are lapideous, hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those that are not fearful, as one must do the extraction of those that do not make contrary archeria.
And the operation in section of those that is that you spread those with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Because if it is that which contains humidity, then you section it in sections according to the longitude by superficial sections according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line .B. until the line .G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of all, because many well-gradated returns, if it remains from some cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian inguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the wound and let it until another day, because many corrode all that is removed from that skin.
And then iterate over that inguent Egyptian secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with inguent until it is healed.
And if you find fatty swellings, then cut into them according to this method: I have a section in the form of a cross, and I cut once between the two lips of the section and scrape off all that rotten part, and I forcefully extract the fluid from the tunic which contains it.
Perhaps you will need to make a counter-irritation, then do so that you can counteract the primary irritation first.
And similarly, make a lapified application of section and cure according to what you have said; and an application on the lapified section is less grievous, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some veins are like those of these apostemas which are in the head in some old men whose veins have no humidity; the cause is that you should not make an incision on an apostema on the head of an old woman and touch the apostema thus with a rough, asperous, white instrument, which cannot be trampled, and if you touched it with that percussive instrument, it would plague her.
Perhaps in other accidental apostemas on the head another chapter is not necessary, thus like the apostemas that come to the heads of children and devour the roots of the ears, but the section of all these should be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those parts which are lower down for so that the body of the sane person may be alleviated in the lower parts.
And then heal those with water that is suitable for that cure.
Chapter 42.
About the section of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Softened masses often form these apostemas on the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some softened masses occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck, and those masses that are generated between them, and all the scrofula of those is within its proper tunic, and thus like in the nodes and apostema of the head, thus as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are masses, because some of them are lapified, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey a cure.
Then in that one which you see with good disposition in the Touchment, of which the color of that which is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is augmented throughout the whole part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not painful, so that you should make a superficial section of the upper part above the line of G., within the line of B., and scrape off all the part, and extend two lips of the codena on each side, or one lip if you need it, thus as we have said in the apostemas of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve should not be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not touch your hand in incision, or quiet the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; because if you cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then stop in the plague vetriol trissat or other powders which staunch the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and lay it thus until the acuity of the apostema is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purified. When the blood has been absorbed.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then investigate if it is said to indicate whether there are any causes of the other small scrofulas, so cut into them and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then beware that you do not cut into that scrofula at its root. Beware lest you leave that in a double fold strongly and let it be until it falls by itself, if it does not cause harm.
And then complete the plague of old wound which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
And if you cut into that entire scrofula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much as possible so that there remains no superfluity.
Perhaps you see that there has remained a superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, beware that you intend to cut into its root, and separate it and administer suture and what is said.
And those of the scrofulas that contain humidity, perforate them with a superficial perforation here where it appears to you the place of maturation of it, and stop the perforation of what is dry below the body, thus as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with calques in ointment and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And if you have often experienced the plague being in a state of putridity, then you will heal that wound generated by corrupted flesh, until it is healthy.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the pillow of an accidental abscess that occurs in the armpit.
They discovered these antiquities in this section of the pillow, and we do not see anyone in our land who has made that wound.
And this is the inscription on the sermon of those.
More often in men there is a lack of skill, because the extraction of the pillow should be avoided, since it cannot be done gently, for that would require opening all the veins and major vessels of the thigh.
More often in those who have abscesses bursting in the mouth or armpit or two kidneys, when the badness is not in the blood, because they use the section of the pillow to flee from the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to cut, they incise the pillow below three circles of the circles of the pillow, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the ciphac (hip), not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of the sacred son are hollow.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then when he extends the tendon of the armpit to the ninth, and then returns the tendon until it reaches the channel, more avoid the sacred veins if you see any of those causes.
And then incise the hip according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the channel for the weakness which is from that excess matter in the water that is from the disorder and for the abolition of the vote.
And thus the open wound remained for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the tendon to the wound, and thus alone they will be the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh nourish until it is healthy.
And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but to see that some of these abscesses have opened the armpit of the thigh, and the thigh has come into mortality, and its wing is between the scapulae, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
And for that, I command to leave the open wound until the evil of the badness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command thus the wound, and cure it until it is healthy.
And what I have seen through my own eyes, is that a servant held a knife and put it in his left armpit and incised one part of the vein of the lung, and I was called for its cure, and I began to touch thus as it was touched by the dead, and I discovered the wound and I touched the sacred blood which was issuing from the small wound.
Therefore, I was forced to confess that he had not incised a vein nor guided it, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healthy.
And I did not accuse the servant if he did not ask for help in the vote, and then some days returned to the administration of his own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the hip there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the section on abscess which occurs in the armpit beforehand, and it is called hernia of the armpit.
This abscess named hernia of the armpit is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one resembles swollen nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess which is made by nodulation of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not seem that it makes a presumption about the iron except in the one that is small. And you prove that and investigate it with the aforementioned, and if you find it resembling swollen nodes, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you incise it thus like the nodes, and extract it from the water that contains the flesh and bursiclam; and otherwise, then it is carefully examined throughout the entire essence, and then I cure the place where it needs healing until it is healthy.
Chapter 45.
About the section on the species of nodes.
There are many species of nodes and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And it seems that I recommend thus the difference between node and exit wound, as it makes doubt.
Therefore, I say that there is a mixture of heat and fever and violent pains inside, which settles the turbulence of the superfluity; and it is a complete putrid decomposition that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Perhaps there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a certain cipher or key that is hidden in its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a wound and it is made thus as a void, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because they are fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what you have said in the division.
Therefore, when you approach the cure of nothing, that you expel that and inquire at the beginning of the instrument which is called introèmes, according to what you will find its form in the chapter that is properly assigned to this.
And it is the manner of inquisition of abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you found humidity in the abscess, and you will rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the codena.
And finally, you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introèmes and consider what has been left in its vestige.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert them in a superficial section according to what has been said about the other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity in the vestige of the introèmes, then you know that it is fat.
And cut above it in a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus, as you have been taught, and suspend it with onions, and scrub the entire affected area to facilitate, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, above that and extract that sania from the node.
Perhaps if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many veils are lifted to achieve this, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of it.
Because if there is no remainder of anything, little or too much, the node returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part of the remainder is left, then complete the plague with some corrosive and sharp powders, and strengthen the plague, and pause over that which sits as a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
And if it is a large node, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure it with what encloses.
Perhaps if the pulse is contrary to it, or non-pulsating, then you touch and fill the place of the third trissat which is vetriol and leave that straight for two days or three until the plague is reduced and the turbulence of the blood is restored; and then return to inspect what has been removed from the node.
Chapter 46.
About the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
About those are the forms of the introèmes, and they are of three species, which of them is large, and of them is medium, and of them is small.
The form of the large introème is this:
The form of the small introème is this:
Thus made of iron, of aluminum, of curved extremities decently, so that they fix the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berid.
And they are of three species, because one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experience, its shape:
The form of the medium experience, its shape:
The form of the small experience, its shape:
It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and bubos, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
And they are made of rhodonite, gross, leons, thus with large agulhas in which the selhas are situated, and they are made of eram citrine, or of eram or of iron, or of silver, And the milhors are when they are made of eram citrine.
And they are made of the experience of black lead, which accords that for those abscesses the fistulas are opened in the cavity of which they are reflected, and they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
And they are of three species, because some of them are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and of its structure.
Form of the large experience of lead:
Form of the medium experience of lead:
Form of the small experience of lead:
The forms of ulcers are of various special kinds, because those that are simple, are only a curvature alone, and of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of their openings, which are of three kinds.
And those ulcers have two curvatures, and of three kinds.
And their openings have three curvatures, and are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple ulcer, form of it:
Form of a large ulcer having two curvatures: Form of a medium-sized ulcer having two curvatures: Form of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
Form of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
Form of a medium-sized ulcer having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, because those that are large, medium-sized, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those are which are made with sharp and acute edges, and the other extremities are not-sharp, and not placed in such a way, but rather to be used gently in the excavation of nodes, for fear of injuring a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be comforted and tranquility may be obtained for a little while, which is necessary for the treatment of the abscess.
And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, just like the veins.
These are the forms of ointments and they resemble the forms of rays, which is made with alcohol.
And it is in the pointed extremity of the spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and before, when you wish, just like vessels.
The forms of spatulas, which are used to extract between the fingers for the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the pains, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping glasses which absorb the flow of blood, and they are of three kinds; large, medium-sized, and small; the forms of it:
These are the forms of citrus ointments, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is seen that these kinds of cupping glasses are large, medium-sized, and small, so that they absorb the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
However, they are not used to absorb blood from every part of the body, and they are only used in fleshy areas, such as on the arms and thighs, and on the flesh of the chest and abdomen, and similarly to the fleshy areas of the limbs.
And some evacuated are made from those other small instruments similar to lancets of fibers, according to this form; for which the blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy, or for fear of injuring a vein or artery.
And some evacuated are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Some evacuated are swollen breasts of some men who have the defect of sleeping with women, and thus their breasts are swollen, and similar to those of women, and Roman abscesses, wounds.
And to the one who has this, it is seen that you should incise those with lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excavate the entire grossness, and then fill the wound with incarnated medicinal plaster, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with cosidura, and cure the one who will be healed.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its greatness just like in women, then it will be divided into two lateral sections, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which will be contained in the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then excavate the codena which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision to allow the bad humor to flow out of the patient's anxiety, and for the flux of blood, then it is likely that you will fill the wound with submerged corruption and thus corrode away the romantic grayishness, and therefore cure the corrosion that is eating away.
Chapter 48.
About the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are a type of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus that is sacred.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is in the abscess of the wound is evacuated, then you complete the wound with a lot of cotton and leave it open for another day.
And then the wound should be dressed and cured in a convenient way according to that, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess of the species of nodes is, and of the scrofula, then you should make an incision above that, as we have said in the section about scrofula incisions.
If the wound is extended to that point where it becomes putrid, then administer cautery to it according to what we have previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
About the incision of abscesses that are caused by inflammation or by a vein.
When inflammation is broken, and the code is consolidated which is above that, then many times an abscess is caused by signs for which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when an abscess is due to inflammation it is often added in the front of the body; and when you touch the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor.
And that which is due to a vein is recognizable by its manifestation on the surface of the body.
And the incision about this abscess is erroneous, and it worsens in those that are beneath the wings, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is likely that its cure will be difficult, and that which is on the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Maybe about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, incise in the code section in the loin; and then open the section with an unciform instrument, and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then put a thread above that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double ligature in two places, — which causes you to have a evacuation of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then puncture the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer cure in which is generated pus until the ligaments fall; and then heal that which is conveniently adapted to that until it is healthy.
And if it is an abscess by incision of a vein, then it is likely that you will have it in your hand where it is possible to make an incision on the code, and then insert the needle beneath the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with two ligaments according to what you have said about the ligament of a grapevine on two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Maybe you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the wire into that needle beneath all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the four ligatures in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until when you have sat what is in it, then you incise the superficies of the code, and leave that which is tied to it.
And then pause over the pus that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with calves and conveniently adapted until it is healthy.
Chapter 50 of the abscess that is caused by twisting of nerves.
Thus abscesses are caused in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses are caused in nerves when they are struck by percussion or caused by superfluous tremors, and by similarity.
And it is made in the manner of it in the places of the joints or of the ankle, or in every place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar to the color of another body, and it is in the major dispositions of its own places, and when it is stricken with vehemence, it feels like the patient has a stupor.
And it is not an abscess added in the front of the body, and therefore it is beneath the code, and it is weakened on all sides and does not go to the parts mentioned beforehand nor afterwards.
Therefore, it seems that those who are in joint pain do not know how to evacuate the iron, because strong contractions hinder them.
Perhaps he who is in the head or in the forehead feels a numbness in the space around him. Maybe it is a slight abscess, then you have to make a small incision and separate that which is rotten.
And if it is large, then you suspend it in an onion, and extract that, and put aside that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Head.
From the section of the abscess that which proceeds from the chest and proceeds to the belly.
It happens that some men have worn-out and weakened intestines in their bellies and in other parts of their body, which are called fungal due to similarity with those having mushrooms, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and already their lips are converted, and it is about those who are small, and it is about those who are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two things that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white things, with small roots.
And already his lips were turned inward and were split, and humidity flowed from him all the time.
Then I inspected him and looked deeply into one of his feet, where 18 ulcers were. and the other foot had six ulcers.
And the operation on the inspection of their urine is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of his stool is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you inspect it thoroughly, and you see in your presence your cauteries in the fire, because many weakened intestines need to expel much blood; and if you feel the blood, cauterize that.
And if the patient is poor and terrified, beware of inspecting him with iron; maybe then take a recently made poultice of lead, and strengthen it on that stool, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it on for two days.
And then adjust it in the structure of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead until it is separated and falls through its own effort.
Maybe it is of large roots, then in the inspection of him there is some cause of fear and of fear, and especially in one who is in the belly.
Maybe it is possible that you inspect his death, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then cure him until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to inspect him who is of dark color, of little sentiment, of light regard, because that one is almost cancerous.
And I will find a remedy for cancer soon.
Chapter Two.
On the cure of inflammation of the navel.
Inflammation of the navel is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the womb which is above the belly, and veins of it or hernia according to how they proceed into other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as it has been said, or by constricted ventilation in him.
Maybe it is due to a fissure of the womb and by movement of the vein, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion's pain, and appears in diverse situations. And if it is due to the exit of the hernia, then the situation of that which we have recounted, with more vehement diversity, and as you press on those ties, it is hidden, and then returns; and strongly it is in him, and it is magnificent with many introductions of banishment and vehement effort.
Maybe due to humidity, then it is a lion and is not hidden when you press on your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to blood, then in this case the veins appear with the abscess inclining towards blackness.
Maybe it is due to bad flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Maybe it is due to ventilation, then his touch is a lion's.
And the operation on him is that you consider then if the inflammation of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or ventilation; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of him, because in this case there is fear and fear, just as I have written in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
And if the inflammation of the navel is due to the hernia or the vein, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold his arm straight, and be standing extended; and then anoint with a tent in the circuit of the whole navel, and then command him to stand turned between his hands above the belly, and then circle around with a poultice on the circuit of the navel above the place where he has felt the pain; and then extend the death of the abscess to the parts below in one large ulcer; and then bind in the circuit with a strong poultice or with a decent treatment.
And if you have extended the thigh of the affected limb over the ligament and inserted your finger into that indicator and felt the intestine; and if you have not found it or guarded it by the ligament, then you extract the excrement and push the intestine back to its proper place in the belly.
And if you have touched the fabric, then take it with an unguent; and remove its superfluities.
Maybe if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that node, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the affected limb in many ways of crossing, which make them penetrate; and then strengthen the affected limb in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area inside so that the extended flesh can fall back into place; or remove what is subtle and you will see, and then cure that limb with a remedy that covers the wounds inside so that it may be healthy.
And if the prominence of the navel is from flesh or humidity, then cover so that you conquer the affected limb thus as we have said and expel the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that limb with a remedy that covers and consolidates the area.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have spoken, in the division, of a type of cancer and how it is possible to reach a cure for it with medicines, and what is hindering its cure with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is generated in the marrow and caution is necessary for its cure.
And they said that some ancient physicians thought that certain types of cancer are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like the kind found in the breasts or thighs and having a similar appearance to the members allocated to extract all that, and especially when it starts small.
Maybe when it is old and great, it does not cover that which belongs to it, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been attained by that.
And the operation on it is what has been allocated thus as we have said, that you should precede and leave the patient free from cholera and black bile, and then you will see that manifest repetition.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which the operation is located, and prohibit uncleanness in the trajectory of the veins which cover that; and then concave all parts with good codena for a thorough examination so that none of the roots of it remain. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightly, and empty the places, and purify the thick blood all by your hand or with an instrument in which it is possible for you to use instruments.
Maybe if you find opposition of thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure that with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not only the species of altitudes alone, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypsochara, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient is already debilitated, or it is another disease, another dropsy, thus as it is in the toes or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Maybe if you find the patient with excessive vertigo, and in him there is no other disease but only dropsy alone, and not an infant nor old, then the manner of the operation on it is that you elevate the patient between your arms, and the minister will press his belly with his hand, filling the water at the part below the navel, and then take spathic spine according to this form:
It is of two sharp parts long, of sharp extremity thus as spine; maybe however it is in it some short smallness little by little, so that in the operation on it nothing passes into the intestine, and that leads to it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, because then it covers that you should section them alone from the navel for three digits at the parts below, in the right of it above the navel.
Maybe if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right.
And do not cover that your section is above the ribs, above which you want to place the patient so that they do not corrode the superfluous humors at that free location.
And then perforate with the entire instrument to the codena, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand in the spatium between the codena and the siphac, and you will excoriate it; and if the quantity of an ounce or surroundings.
And then perforate the siphac inside so that it reaches the spatium at the desired location, and it is there that the water flows. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold, on which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is shaped like the extremity of a feather, thus sometimes:
And at the upper extremity of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends onto the instrument, and evacuates the water at the same time in moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it will not cover at the hour, thus the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or it approaches the five signs that are near death.
You evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the patient's disposition signifies to you, regarding the virtues of their pulse and the goodness of their complexion.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it is retained by the codena which retains the hole that is on the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perforate it in that manner.
And then insert the instrument another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days over fear, and beware of error so that you do not leave too much water.
But if you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then cure it by burying it in hot sand, and placing it in a warm bath, and exposing it to the sun for a long time; and cure it with desiccative medicines until it is healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mixture and the fit of the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which has been said before.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of children who are born with non-perforated urinary places.
Some birth defects of children are thus from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a straight hole or is not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to create a perforation of the spatium as soon as it is born with a subtle instrument according to this form:
And then pause at the hole with a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass three days or four.
And when one wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return it.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not leave this clarity.
But that of which the hole is straight should be medicated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, are misled, because of this, that which is born and the hole deviates from the end of the virgin's head so that it cannot urinate at the divided parts, until it elevates the virgin to their parts above; and it is not according to generation, for thus the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
And the manner of operation on it is that the patient should be seated on their back, and then extend the head of the virgin to their left hand with vehement extraction, and insert the head of the virgin at the place of the perpucii in a sharp spatium, thus as an insertion of a feather, or that you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the virgin appears like the head of the virgin and that the hole falls into its proper place according to what is necessary.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens thus; and pause at the moment when you absorb the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 6.
On the white ulcer that occurs in the prepuce of the head of the virgin and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the virgin.
Many birth defects occur with this ulcer in the virgin and it is an excess of bad flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend with a subtle hook and absorb it until it is entirely removed; and then pause on that cotyledon submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the wound with daily application until it is healed.
If you suspect it is malignant, of dark color, then believe that you should administer cautery at the site of the lesion and its root.
Perhaps if you suspect it is in the foreskin of the penis, not circumcised, and one part of the foreskin is inside and another part is outside, then believe that you should remove the foreskin which is inside until it consolidates; and then you cure what was outside, because when you cure the inside, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
And likewise, accidents occur in the genitals and in the blackened and corroded foreskin, therefore believe that you should conquer all that has been denigrated and that wants to corrupt or is corrupted; and place a line upon that which is good, which is touched by the powder of scorpions' tails and of errors and crumbles.
And then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
Perhaps if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery in the following form:
because juvenile cautery is at two disposed moments, thus there is a flow of blood and the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that hour, then believe that you should introduce into the middle of the foreskin a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in that where the foreskin is sound, and upon it no circumcision has been performed; and when adherence occurs due to plague or apostema) believe that you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then believe that you should scrape with a spatula for some cause of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a subtle drizzle, which has already been softened in lukewarm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
And then it is cured with a stipetic wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 47.
On the purification of children and the cure of that which occurs to those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity thus with the other plagues: perhaps more imperious since it is of our operation and of our will, and those of that are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a gentler way to preserve their health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation, which causes us to have trodden the major part of the artifices and barbarisms using circumcision and purification with novacula and torches; and they used a ligament with faith and incision on the nail.
And I have prohibited all these manners and did not find better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because many times effusions come down from above, because the code of the foreskin has two tunics, and one tunic is below, and thus it is forced into another incision and secure pain. And in purification which is done by alphabetication, and it is digital, of which the sabatiers make use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because thus it enters into its hole.
Perhaps in the operation on the nail, thus it obstructs iron and corrupts your operation. And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
Perhaps of the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with faith, goodness, experiment discovers for me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which the acuity that is above is thus with the acuity that is below; and therefore as you take your hand so proportionally, and incise accordingly in one time; and it is done with compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the penis of all parts, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you do not do but that you place the faith in its penis only thus, and that you leave it until another day.
And then do that to cheer up in all that manner which is at your possible ability of what receives its intelligence. And then make that to be between your hands most prepared and not seen by anyone; and hide the forceps in your hand or below the finger, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand at the orifice of the patient and blow into the colon, and draw out what is stuck there, so that the head of the orifice is cleared, and then carefully remove what has accumulated there in a state of putrefaction.
The shape of the forceps for manipulation, this is the shape:
Some extremities are not-talented and others are talented, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and it is the length of the two aligned fingers thus as the length of two wrists in agreement.
The mistake in manipulation is that you forcefully evacuate the entire internal colon, or part of it, into the incision.
Then you should extend that from your time to your finger, pointing at the affected area and making an incision according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it there.
But if three days have passed, and you see that the orifice has become inflamed beneath the affected area, then let it be until it is ripened by the aposteme's heat, and excavate what has been facilitated, and insert it according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the orifice, lest it will not be numb to that.
And then cure what has been done with the powder, which consolidates the plague of the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it has been inserted into the colon according to measure, and you have bound the parts above, that which is not noticed by it.
And then cure what has been done with that which we have said until it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by cold obstruction or by stone or by congealed blood, or by injury or by flesh wounds, and it resembles those things that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in that which we have said is vehemently made the cause upon the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called syringe, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and its subtle conquering edge is like a canal of a bird's feather, subtly long in similarity to a palm and a half, at whose subtle end.
And the method of evacuation of urine for that is to take the double-edged file and place it in the extremity of the wool or cushion for good adhesion; and you insert the extremities of the file into the area below the syringe, and insert them with forceps if any superfluous cause of the wool, then introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then carefully bind the syringe with a bandage and album of that humour.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and embrace the bladder with it and the orifice with olive oil and apricot kernel.
And then insert the syringe to facilitate until it reaches the root of the orifice; and then double the orifice above at the part of the navel; and then fill the syringe with that; and then fill it until it reaches the bladder, and that cures the patient of the void cause, and it is not done thus according to this order, but rather in the manner which goes to tortuousness.
And then extend the file into the wool little by little, because the urine seeks the wool.
Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use a syringe, do not cease to do that and use a syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient obtains great alleviation.
Chapter 49.
The quality of the cleansing of the vesicle is accomplished by a clamp-like instrument, which is suited to accord with that.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or it is congested with blood, or it is constricted by a purulent flow, and you want to instill fluids and medications, then make use of an instrument called a clamp-like device, and this is its form.
but in the extremity of it is dull, so it is closed. And in that there are three channels: two from one side, and sometimes another.
At the commencement it is a hollow concavity, in which is what is inflamed, and it follows according to the quantity that oppresses it, until when some cause draws away from the humidity, it is drawn away, and when it is expelled, with that it is drawn away, and when it is expelled slowly, according to what the clamp-like device does, fixing naptha in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to draw away humidity from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp-like device into the humidity, and draw away that water which is inflamed above the parts, because the humidity is drawn away into the cavity of the clamp-like device.
And then insert the extremity of the clamp-like device into the orifice according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then inject the humidity with that which is inflamed, because that humidity penetrates the bladder at once, and the patient feels it immediately.
The shape of the subtle crystal by which the bladder is crystallized, and that is its form.
And it is made of silver or of gold, of which the head can be similarly shaped like a small feather, and then the canal is cleared of the ligament.
And then take the bladder in hand, and pause in that the humidity you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with double faith, and heat that humidity over the focus.
And then insert the extremity of the crystal into the orifice.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already penetrated the bladder.
But if you are not present with the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it from that circle; and perforate it with all its return; and then insert a strong faith in those channels, as they revolve; and then add the circle as it is added also to the circumference, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidity, and other waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and make it like that as it was made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Chapter 12.
On the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone in which a surgical operation is made with the hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now narrate that in an explicit exposition and abbreviation.
So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes from the infants; and of its signs is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his orifice, and many veins are felt, and then it is dressed; and in that way they are forced to open their buttocks in those places.
And it is a consolation for the health of the infants of that until they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the veins. But in the young ones it is worse because it is between those.
And of that which the stone is greater and the cure is less easy; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the commencement of that which modifies the patient with crystal which extracts all the filth which is in the seven vessels; because that filth prohibits the conception of the stone unless there is an investigation of it.
And then the patient should take the seven steps and be consoled and comforted meanwhile, so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, or jumps from its place with some vessels.
And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and the hands of it are then freed from its bonds, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
And then seek all that and the whole defense beforehand.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then you will cut it immediately with section over it.
And if you do not cut all of it with the whole instrument, then it is necessary that you anoint the whole tieu with olive oil from your left hand, if the patient is an infant, or the right hand if it is a young adult, and insert it into the seven vessels. And search for the stone that was hidden beneath the toe. You turned that small stone inward towards the neck of the bladder.
And you press above on that with your toe, and expel it from the parts in front of the bladder where you feel the pain.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand between the genitals, and let his other hand remain on the back of the spine, below the genitals, in the area where the pain is felt.
And then you insert a spatula between the skin and the place where this is the shape of it: and you separate the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but next to the left thigh; and there is pain on that stone and the toe, and it is a transverse pain, so that the pain in front is wide and deeply rooted according to the quantity of the stone as possible, and no more, because too much compression holds the toe, which is in the anus, the stone that gives the pain, and it is often forgotten or overlooked.
And you know that the stone is somewhere in the area where it touches and borders, because the examination of it is made difficult by that.
And from that water it seems like a bean, and it's round, and it's difficult to examine it clearly.
So if it's the one that touches and borders, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it's not overlooked, then it's necessary that you operate on that, or that you grasp it decently with the extremity that is thus like a file on which you grasp over the stone, and don't evacuate it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you can't operate on that, then you amplify the trajectory a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a strong vinegar treatment.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then you insert it; and then you push in a little water; and it seems that it's not moving more than two.
And if it's a very large stone, then ignorance is that you insert it with great pain, because it hurts the patient in two ways: either it kills or it drives them to continuous urination, because the place is not fully consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it from the inside so that it's forgotten, or operate on the fracture of it with the forceps to extract it in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and grasp it strongly. And apply to that dry dressing infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and fresh water, so that the post-operative wound may be cooled.
And then lift up the patient onto his bed, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
And when that is undone, bathe the area with water and much oil, and then take care of it with gentle daily washing and gentle rubbing until it is healed.
But if in the wound apostema causes corruption and decay, and it seems like the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this urine is prohibited (and this is known through the exit of the blood with urine), then insert the toe into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the corrosion of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose all sorts of corruption, with what is convenient for its cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary during all the hours of the entire cure that you read the writings and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and it's in the meat of the bladder, and it's stuck in it, and urination is prohibited, then cure it with what you have recommended beforehand so that you pervade to the pain, because many vain efforts have been made for this cure and are accused of pain; and already you have spread it, and it's that you take a perforator of iron alfalfa, of which this is the shape:
of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed in a tube.
And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder below the stone so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing with facility until the perforator reaches that stone. And you turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until you make it pass through to the other side; because the urine is then absorbed.
And then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the part in front of the bladder, because it is crushed, and it's forgotten in the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this cure is not suited to you for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a fig leaf under the stone, and another fig leaf above the stone. And apply binders around the stone in that vertebra between two ligatures. And extract that out. And dislodge the ligament and clear the congested blood, which is made in the plague.
And it is not necessary to dislodge the ligament from under the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when the fig leaf is dislodged, the codena returns to its place and covers the plague.
And for that reason it is necessary to elevate the fig leaf above, so that you lift the codena to the upper parts, or return to give a complete complement, and cover the plague as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stone from women.
A stone in women is rarely generated.
If you see a stone in some of those, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman's strength is weakened.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe her symptoms to the doctor when she is cast out, or is one of the women having husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the matrix.
And the fourth reason is that the place of the section on stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because it requires a deep incision, and in that there is fear.
If it is necessary to provoke you to this, then it is known that you take a woman who knows how to do the operation, and few are experienced.
If you are deprived of that, then seek a mature and subtle woman who is skilled in the art, or presents a married woman who is experienced in the affair of women, or a woman who has taken part in this art.
Then make that present, and command her to do everything you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which causes it to be examined if the woman is weakened, then it is known that she puts her finger in her buttock and feels for the stone.
Then if you find that, cut that below the finger, and then command her to insert it above that.
If she is not weakened, then command the married woman to insert her finger into the hollow of the patient's thigh and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and grasps it with good comprehension.
Then if you find that, then it is known that gradually the stone is moved away from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts, almost to the bottom of its virtue, until it arrives at the root of the thigh.
And then insert it into the aforementioned position of the matrix at the root of the thigh, from which part it is to be extracted and sent to that place, and the finger of hers should not be removed from the stone, cutting below it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the rod above that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in the incision according to the quantity which you know will be sufficient to extract the stone from there.
And you know that the species of stones are many: because some are small and large, and smooth and rough, and long and round, and have ridges.
Then you know how many species there are of them for that reason that you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust at the vitreous location and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
And make sure you prepare among the instruments those which are said to be in the extraction of stone in men, so that they will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is inserted, then you stop powdering over the location and strengthen those pulvils and strict descent, and do not iterate this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because the patient will soon die. And then cure the plague.
Then when the acuteness of the blood is calmed down for some days, and the location is purified, then you return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On incision about hernia in the groin.
Hernia in the groin is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane below the codena of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called a membranous hernia.
Some remedies are in the proper preparation of nature on the part of man, which prepares a cure for the defect of the womb, so that it is seen as another womb; and it is the code of the generation between the white seed that we have mentioned, and it is not just bitter.
And the generation of this hernia is due to the debilitation that occurs in the genitals, because it is found that this matter is poured into them, and some veins occur through percussion on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and filthy, or it is white and watery, and that is what is most frequent.
And the signs by which it is known on this aggregation of water are these: because if it is in the white seed that we have mentioned, then the abscess is declining a little in length, thus cum figure of womb, and appears the genitals, because the humidity contains all parts.
And if the humidity is in the proper womb, then the abscess is declining in the part of the womb and thus one estimates that it is another womb.
And if the humidity is between the code of the genitals and the white seed, then one finds the sentiment there.
And as you want to know the color of the humidity, then you explore the color of the humidity in the abscess in the innermost cavity, whose form is preceded; and according to what has been seen in the vestige of the cavity, judge that it is from there.
So when we come to the cure of the iron deficiency, then it is necessary that we command the patient to take flebotomate if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron.
And then return to sitting on the two chairs above some cause a little higher, and stop there for a few drops.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, which extends its rod to one of two lattes at the code of the genitals and at the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a wide spatula and separate the code of the genitals from my own place for the length within, close to the pentacle.
And make the section according to a right-angled incision at a distance from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white seed, comprising.
And remove that, and observe, and keep yourself for so long that you do not insert that; and your removal is the one that removes by parting thus that it is suspended in the womb most and subtly scrutinized in the removal according to the quantity possible for you.
And then perforate the full seed of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with uncias, and extend the seed to the upper parts; and do not touch the code of the genitals comprising, and insert the seed in that manner which is possible for you. And insert it in its totality or in pieces, and majorly widen the wide lattes subtly, because if you do not perceive exquisitely the insertion of it, it is not made securely that the water does not return.
Moreover, if the womb proceeds from that deformity of its code at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the seed, return it to its place, and then adjust the two labia of the code of the genitals with a suture, and then cure it thus as the other plagues, until it is healed.
And if you find the womb corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are above the suspensors, and extract the womb, and then cure it in the way that we have mentioned.
Moreover, if the water is added in two parts simultaneously, then you know that the two are hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what has been done in the other incision; and if it is seen by you as a work, then you do it.
And then you purge the blood, and enter into the sections of the hidden lanolin or in rozated lanolin; and stop before another lanolin which you have hidden in wine and oil, and expand it over two genitals and the miracle of the belly; and stop above double drops and pulvils, and bind them above the lien which is according to this form:
And then press two drops and fill the lanolin with carmenated lanolin according to this likeness; and make extremities with those which are taken from coto or humid lanolin, and add them in structure to the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the cul up to the two, and the second takes hold at the part of the pantenilh, and two extremities over two thighs below and two other extremities over two ankle bones, and all the structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
Some of these remedies are artificially medicated by cautery in place of sectioning with iron; and it is that you take a cutting cautery subtly and insert it into the codena of the genitius, and it is ignited according to what has been recommended, so that the white ciphac containing water may be discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form. and it is assembled in a Greek letter.
And then pierce the ciphac, and it is ignited until all humidity is expelled.
And then extend the ciphac to an inch, and scrape around an inch, and scrape with a subtly ignited cautery; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the fire that must not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
Perhaps you have made an opposite apostema in the hour of sectioning or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure the opposite contrariety that you have made for this, with a curative treatment that convenes to it according to what has been said.
Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not hope for a second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified that you, for this reason that we have spoken of the signs, that this hernia is painful.
Then it is necessary that you raise the patient on some elevated seat, then pierce the apostema in the lowest part of his spatium lat, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And it is a broad perception until all the water is drained.
And then pause on the short place and lift that and leave it there, so that the remainder of the water drains. And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Perhaps the contrariety is at the edge of the water at that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason that the white pannicol in the orrifici of the wound makes a contrariety and prohibits the issuance of the water, then it is necessary that you put in the wound a painful instrument or one which extracts the water from the hydropitz, in the form of which precedes; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and it is augmented after six months or during those; and when it is augmented, then it must be pierced according to that method and manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
On sectioning about fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the sectioning about this hernia, there is fear of losing a part of the major dispositions; because it has been seen that its dismissal and being saved by that better way.
And you will remember the operation on that and the species of the apostemas.
Therefore, I say that the apostemas are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharp inflammation, which is poured out into the genitals, or for percussion.
And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it is not troubled by pain, and it is a heavy apostema.
And often it is a lumpy apostema, of which the color is dark, and it is not felt in it.
And some remedies are done for numbing of the roots, and for inflammation of those as well as when the memory of it has been perceived, or for inflammation of veins.
Perhaps that which is for inflammation of roots is recognized by the dispersion of the apostema when it comprehends those in the tender fingers; and it does not touch that.
Perhaps that which is done for inflammation of veins is not dispersed from any cause, because of the compression in the fingers.
And it is possible that about this species a section has been made and about the other carnal parts; and it is that you insert the codena of the genitals, and then stretch the fire to the upper parts, and extract that from the white ciphac, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and ligate them, and insert the suspensors so that you remove that from all the parts of the fire.
Therefore if the fire is already consolidated in those carnal parts, then it is necessary that you extract the fire and insert it.
And if it is adherence until some cause of the ciphac, or between that which is between the veins, then it is necessary that you remove all that adherence and insert it by round insertion.
Perhaps it is a birth of flesh in the place of adherence which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that which is of it, and extract the fire as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the woolen cloth with lanolin oil and rose water; and take care to apply it to the other treatment so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia, which is a vital issue.
It is an abscess wrapped up by some wrapping resembling a broth, and it causes softening of the testicles, and makes difficult the exercise of movement and walking on the affected part.
And in the cure of this illness, it is necessary to be afraid of water, because of which there is preceding memory (or recollection).
However, I believe that I should describe the operation according to what the first ones did.
And I say that you should do this: elevate the affected part on a high chair; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie the codes of the genitals with threads in the manner of bayseles that are probative to the rod; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then insert a spatula flat and thick, through a transverse incision in the right of the veins, until the veins are discovered.
And then scrape off the entire affected part, just as you have said in the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which there is double faith, and bind it in the first of the places where life is, and bind it with another gaze at the back of them. And then insert them in the middle place for a right incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healthy, so that the veins may flow, one of two genitals, because it is not bad for this.
But if life is in all the veins, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for this reason cease to flow with the veins, so that they may be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the veins, and that they may be stabilized, or that they cease for this reason, so that there may not be juvenile growth in them.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the extended siphac above the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by descending the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the siphac or of excess of it, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by outcry, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the siphac, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess gathered inside until you feel the belly, so that the siphac compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is by incision of the siphac, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing below the fallen code, and this is by evacuation of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the siphac.
And some wandering paths are outside the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia circling.
And some wandering paths are made in the ventosity, and some wanderings occur in the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is at this great perniciousness of the illness, and some wanderings cause bad pain and major aggravation when it is premature.
And in the cure of the species of this illness iron is used, because it is necessary that the treatment be avoided in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with its hand at the back parts of its cavity if it obeys to its own return, and then it is invested over the sieve col between the two breasts, and raises the legs of it.
And then stretch the codeine which is the codeine of the testicles at the back parts, and insert the codeine of the testicles entirely for the length; and then place in two labia of the incision uncis according to what you need to close the incision with them.
And if the incision is according to the quantity that it is possible for you, then from that the hole may be wandering.
And then scrape off that membrane which is below the codeine of the testicles, until the white hard siphac of some part is discovered.
Then you insert the thread said in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white siphac, which is below the codeine of the hole, and between the siphac according to, and absolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
And then place the hand on the back of the testicles, and also extend the white wax to the entire left side, and elevate the fluid in the wax to the partition of the section; and command the minister to extend the fluid inside and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind a complete solution.
Look for any signs that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the hard white wax. Perhaps you will find some cause, then you will fill that into the belly from below.
And then you thread into the partition behind the back of the testicles for a section of which runs clear and healthy blood, just as we have recommended in that which we said.
And then you administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause on the plague; and administer the ligature that we recommended (and some times the white wax is cauterized, which we said to insert into the tempest of blood flow, because many times it happens that they occur) and release the ligature until it falls by itself.
Perhaps the healing of the wound is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it, and pause on that until it falls according to what we said.
And then you cure the plague with another cure of wounds until it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
About a windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the cure of iron on the liver.
And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we recommended in the hernia that is at five; which is that you lift the veins to the section above that, and you dry in the middle place around the aposteme in that which you work, until the veins fall.
And cure the wound according to what we said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
About the disorder that is done in the ankles.
Sometimes it happens that rupture occurs in the ankles thus as we said, and emerges from the place.
And they do not show any cause of the intestine to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to its natural state in all hours.
Perhaps if the time is prolonged in that, an adjusted fissure is made in the wax until it descends to the intestine in the wax; and it happens for the extension of the wax which is in the ankles thus as we said, the cause is because the wax is extended, and then it is softened and the place becomes apostematous and emerges.
And the cure of it is with a cautery thus as it was preceded by the narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between the two thighs, and then you dry the place of rupture of the apostemes emerging in section for the latitude according to the quantity of three threads.
And then strengthen the white wax that is next to the back until it is discovered.
And then take the rod and pause it on the prominent place of the wax, and press it to the front of the belly.
And then kiss the two prominent places above the extremity of the rod of the wax, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the rod, and do not thread the entire wax, nor extend the fluid, nor another cause thus as you will be able to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure it with the cure of wounds, and as you thread the threads, purify it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the wax is contracted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Chapter 68.
About the softening of the back of the testicles.
Softened medicines on the tips of the testicles in some men are mollified by the quarrels that are among them, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
It is necessary for one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient sit according to his two hips, and to place the entire medicine which is mollified on the natural gland; and then adjust both lips at the seam.
And if you want, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the mollified medicine with three or four stitches and make a firm seam.
Then insert them between the seams; and then take care to cure other wounds inside so that it may be healthy and the veins may flow.
Chapter 69.
Of Castration.
I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I am led to remember it in this book; and there is no need for remembrance of it except for two reasons: one is so that the science of the doctor who is expert in it may know how to cure what happens to him, and another way is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our youthfulness, just as with mules, and goats, and pigs, and similarly with other animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by section of the seed.
Moreover, in that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed, and then they hang down. And then take those with your hand into the wound so that they are resolved and do not appear anymore in the touch.
Moreover, in castration done by section and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the gland of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders, and insert them over each hour of a section until two hours proceed.
And then insert those pus that you will have extracted from it. And do not leave anything of the scab on any cause, but the subtle scab which is above the veins.
And this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to mate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears that the space in the gland of the testicles is between two testicles, forming a female figure, which has hair in place of genitals.
And some softened medicines of that sort cure the urine that is in the gland of the testicles.
Moreover, in women it is a species: and it is that the female has a penis-like thing above the pubis, just like two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all its miniatures, and similarly divided as the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: two of men and one species of women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted horns until they escape the impression of that, and then you will cure them with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men, from which urine is produced that is in the gland of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 71.
On the Protrusion and Eminent Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Protrusion is strongly adjusted according to natural causes until it is restrained and is done with observation; and some softened medicines are magnified in some women so much that they spread out like in men and pierce during intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you hold the excess of protrusion with your hand or with a hook and insert them.
And do not push too far in the insertion, mainly at the root of the reason, so that there is no excessive flow of blood.
And then cure it with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Moreover, born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific womb of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is said to be similar to the parts of the father according to the semblance of the tail (and for this reason the first ones called it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we insert it thus as we insert protrusion, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
On the Cure of Gout.
Gout is when the female's limb is not perforated, or it has a small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to malady which has preceded, and that is done either by flesh not adjusted or by subtle scab or spices.
It is a fault in the womb of the mother, or in her ribs, or in the soft part above it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits conception and pregnancy, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the uterus, if the obstruction is apparent, it is provident; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cyst, and it is attached to both labia, then you touch and disrupt it.
And it is that which rests on both pubic labia, and then you pause with your fingers indicating the place of the retained menstrual blood.
And the woman lies on her back, her legs extended, and then you extend both labia inward so that the subtle cyst is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then you take an ointment and anoint the place with oil, and pause thereon the location, and heal at home for a day so that the location does not become inflamed.
But if the cyst is large and spacious, then you cover it so that you dissect it with a spatula or a scalpel of myrtle.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then you suspend it with an unguent, and dissect it.
And there are your medicines that stop the flow of bloody wounds, such as achatia, and dragon's blood, and hemlock, adjusted to the white album of wolves.
And then you administer a wide poultice of soft lead so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
And hold it for several days and administer lukewarm water of the dry season.
And then it is healed by another cure of consolidation until it is healthy.
And some veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then you cover them so that they dissect according to this method. But if it is for cancerous aposteme, the cancerous aposteme which is in the womb is not made contrary to nature in any method.
Chapter 83.
About the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that are born in the conflict of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins within which they corrode blood continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and are made tails.
And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say also those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Then I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then in those there is no cure made at all.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother above those which feel sensation, then those are cured.
And you cover the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail to the forked branches, or with sharp drag, and dissect those with the roots.
And then you powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the pulverizing powders of wounds, such as cassia and similar to those.
And then you soften the patient's feet for an hour, and then you pause that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that seize in decoction of sumac and of scorches of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and comfort that with honey and wine, and make an emplaster over the back of it.
And if the blood is abscessed, it is so; and if not, make adhere to two ventouses, and to the breasts their scarification.
And then take an ointment and submerge it in juice of colic weed or juice of arnaglossa or juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the location; and then cure the location with an unguent until it is healthy.
And cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 84.
About the perforation of accidental wounds in the womb.
Many species of apostemes are born in the womb, such as cancer and lapidous aposteme and ulcerations and adherent and erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids and raguarrhias and thyl and other apostemes. And I have already said these evils and the species of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
And you see that I have written in this treatise of aposteme, the one which is seen in the womb when it is of those apostemes that collect health, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is made at all.
Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the aposteme in the initial stage is acute with percussion and flicking and fever, and sometimes it infuriates and casts a gloomy sentiment over that area, then it does not consent to perforation, and cures when it helps against the maturation of the accident.
And then you make the woman sit on a chair that has two armrests; and recline her on her back with her legs adjusted to the partition below the belly, and her thighs are spread out, and place her arms below her knees, and bind something around it conveniently.
And then the midwife follows the right method and administers the instrument in the way that opens the orifice of the matrix, which is the form in which you will find those causes that will be treated properly.
And you should minister this instrument so that it reaches the inner part of the womb of the woman, and ensure that the part of the instrument that enters the womb is not larger than the inner part of the womb and hurts the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the inner part of the womb, then you should pause and apply poultices on the texture of the inner part of the womb so that it prohibits the entrance of the entire instrument into the womb.
And you should pause the vertex that runs on the instrument from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertex until it opens the orifice of the womb.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is slippery and soft, then you should extract that which comes out of the head of the womb with a spatula.
And when the afterbirth is evacuated, then you should pause in the placenta a submerged needle in rosated oil or green oil where there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section of the inner part of the womb.
And stop before the womb and above the perineum, a needle submerged in water where there are inflamed ulcers.
And then it is cured, then two days with the poultice that converges to what is convenient until it is healthy.
And some vegetables are washed in the womb and placenta in this way that they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in water where there is a bulbous root of iris or long aristology, and then it returns to the poultice.
And if the placenta is detained in the womb in a withered state, then you should be prohibited from curing it with iron, having no cure for what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to deliver babies that are badly positioned, as if they were medicine, according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth for signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expelling from below and desires to smell the air, and above that which is joined to her part, and hastens the exit of the baby, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the exit of it on the back of the womb, and the second one in that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Then when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the woman be compressed so that the baby descends lightly as it did on the back of the womb, and it is turned to her for the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous matters with good moderation.
But that which is another part is unnatural and unmanageable, because when the baby is exited on its feet and the body of it is exited before the head of it and its feet, and the hand of it is one, or at the foot of it. or it is exited the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and forcibly it is converted on the womb's neck, and it seems like the unnatural figures of it.
Then a necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
And you show the entire figure of those, and what ingenuity is in those so that it is signified for that and it stands on that.
When the fetus is exited on the womb's head by natural effort, and it is vehement against the woman and makes her part difficult, and sometimes its virtue is already debilitated, then make that caesarean section, or let the women hold it, and evacuate the conjunction of the womb with fenugreek powder and olive oil.
And then insert the midwife between the thighs of the woman with a small spatula and bind it to the second one, or extract that from her finger until it corrodes what is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then you should anoint the woman with a mixture of ptili and fenugreek powder with cizami.
And command him to take deep breaths, and hold his chest, so that he may be prepared and make an effort with confidence; and close his mouth and nose for one hour, because the feigned fainting will soon pass.
And if the fake fainting spells are more frequent at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce those minor efforts little by little. Maybe if he does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift his feet off the ground, and place the chair firmly on the earth; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall during the concussion.
And if the many are not turned to torments and death is near, then insert them and extract the remedy from the body or limb with the hand of the doctor who is experienced in drawing out and extracting equally, because that will soon pass.
When the feet are placed on the soles of the feet, then it is necessary that you impel them in, and turn the foot little by little, and make them equal, and take one of his feet and extend them little by little.
Maybe when they are placed between the thighs, then you command him to exert himself, and make an effort with confidence, because it will soon pass if God wills it.
And if it does not pass in the way that we have recommended, then return the foot little by little to its natural position, because it will soon pass more easily in this natural sitting position.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of hot water and dissolving gum, and strike everywhere in the mortar for good percussion, and apply linen to the affected area of the woman, next to the lower part of her abdomen. And make that mixture into a warm liquid, until you obtain the hypochondria.
And since the affected parts of his body are alleviated, then make for him a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause it under him. And when you apply the sub-fumigation for one hour, then place it on a chair, and make an effort to straighten up and open his mouth, and lift him from that, and press the lower part of his abdomen with gentle compression, because soon the feigned fainting will pass.
The sitting position of the foot laterally bent during one of its hands. It is begun in reduction of his hand, maybe if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then place her on the mattress, and shake her thighs with vehement concussion, and administer gentle remedies to the affected areas, and recommend poultices.
And if the inflammation has come, then place her on a chair, and study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the foot according to its natural figure, and make an effort to straighten up the woman and command him to take hold of himself until he is faint.
The sitting position of the foot on the expanded soles, his hands and the surface of his feet are towards his mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the foot and turns it little by little, and thus facilitates it.
And when it is equalized, then stop on the affected area of his body that we have recommended to anoint with oil and poultices.
And command him to massage little by little, and when you have done that, then place her on a chair and command her to incline herself towards the right side, and command him to take hold of himself; and make an effort with confidence. The fetus is prepared on its side.
When you have seen the horror of the mother according to this manner, consider it, and then insert your finger into the second [uterine] passage until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the foot is suspended on the face and neck of his mother, then insert that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then apply poultices to the feet at the injured parts inside so that they pause according to the covering, and order the woman to compress with some wraps, and the sir will be outside getting rid of the bad humor, if God wills it.
The departure of twins or the removal of many feotuses. You know that twins are born with many wraps, and some times three or four, but this is strange and difficult to understand; but I think the cause is outside nature, and it's not alive.
And consider those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and they are separated by a sign, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those; some wraps are outside getting rid of thus as if it's a fetus for natural bad humor, and so they are some wraps for getting rid of unnatural thus as I have recommended.
And if they are difficult cases of their deviance from childhood and come to what I have said about unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as I have recommended.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and I have delayed, and it is ingenious according to the whole figure as it is prepared by the ingenious mind leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some wounds are formed in the matrix of one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have indeed verified that a woman who aborts will not get seven, and another is totally deformed, which causes false measurement of the glorious savages.
And everything that is said to be in the science of the midwife because it strongly supports the small apparent part of that, and therefore one should not oppose what is said.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what I have said in the division of medicine and it is not contrary to what is written, and you are forced to use operative means on hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman is of sound virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a soft bed with her back raised on two pillows, and her head is inclined downwards and her thighs are elevated.
And the midwife should hold that of two parts or be tied to the bed so that the body of hers does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should humidify the mouth of the mother's womb with olibanum and mucus of walnut and fenugreek and sesame oil.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then insert her hand into the womb, and then search for the location where the nails are in the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be turned onto its head, and then you find the nails in its heels, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or on its beard, or in its armpit, or in the proper places of its ribs, or in its hypochondries.
But if the turning is about its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of its ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the nail with the right hand, and stop the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand facilitated and find the nail in some of those places which I have said, until you reach the desired outcome.
And then stop and find another nail in its opposition, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its correct direction solely.
And it is already all part of the process, so that the bad humor of it is alleviated thus as it is done in the teeth, due to the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in that which is between them so that the extension is mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and revolve around that which is retained.
Then if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the nails are permitted to enter the place where it was put out; and do thus until all of the fetus is expelled.
But if the hand is hindered by another, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is expelled, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And thus it is necessary to do so with the other hand and in both feet.
If the head of the foot is large, or if it has an acceleration in the swelling, or if it is in the head of the water-adjusted, then it is necessary to insert between the tender points and bend the head and extract the water, or that which discards with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be seen in the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that is about this.
And similarly, if the foot has a large head by nature: then it is necessary to insert that instrument with a wedge, or to take that instrument with an extractor, as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted towards the ankle, then it should be opened until the humidity that is in the foot is evacuated.
If it is not complicated, nor swollen to an extreme degree, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
And if the abdomen is apostemated or is in a hydropic state, then it is necessary to perforate it until the humidity that is in it is drained.
If the foot is above the six toes, then its attraction is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the matrix is lighter.
If it is constricted towards the abdomen and foot, then it is necessary to extract that instrument which you will have enveloped with your hand, and open the abdomen and foot until what is in them is drained.
If the other members are stagnant and turned towards the head, then the ruler inserts into the left hand; if the mouth of the matrix is open, then insert the hand in the hollow of the kidney, and search for that head, and attach it to the tender points until it reaches the mouth of the matrix, and then insert into it one or two inches, and adjust accordingly.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted by an apostemated tumor which accelerates to it, then it is necessary that there be no disturbance over it; beforehand it is necessary to administer effusion of humid, greasy causes. And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that mollify and humidify.
And if the foot is above the sixth rib, then if possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the preceding foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in patches, and extracted.
And it is necessary that no secondary cause of the disease remains.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostemes caused by the matrix.
And if it causes a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer another cure.
And I have seen a woman with a dead foot in her belly, and then on that same focus another pregnant womb was begun, and then the dead foot became another. It happens to him that for a long time an aposteme was in the sixth embolic; and it swelled until it became a bubonic swelling, and began to break out in a burst.
And I was called to his cure, and I treated him for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Then I paused over him about certain causes of strong attraction, and extracted from him one bone, and then I passed some journeys, and extracted another bone; and I was too marvelously surprised, as if there were no bones in the belly.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead foot.
Then I understood the plague, and extracted many bones from it, the woman existed in the six thousand disposed places, and I had seen it in such a manner for a long time, corrected by one small burst.
And I did not find it strange, but rather that in this science and aid, I helped to make the artificial hand for healing administration.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is opened:
This is the form of strengthening in which the books are bound, to which binding two vertebrae are placed at both extremities of two feet. This emperor's vertebrae needs to be placed more subtly under the strictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood.
And it is the latitude of each foot which has two digits and the margin of each hand which has one digit, and its longitude is a palm and half; and in the middle place of the two feet there are two adjustments of that measuring foot which were already fixed, of which the longitude is a palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is two digits, or a little more.
And these two additions were inserted into the mouth of the matrix so that it would be opened when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form appears more subtle and less irritating:
It is made from the wood of ebony or box trees, according to the strength of the forceps. Sometimes an emperor uses the extremity of it in both additions thus, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the matrix, then you make a circle with the woman on the bed, placing the feet pendant, opening that which is between the thighs. And then open your hand on the instrument thus, making a fork-like grip according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix within, so that the meter makes it as you wish.
The form of vertigo which the ancients described:
Form of impulse in which the foot is propelled:
Form of amputation in which the large head is counter-indicated:
And it is assembled with a forceps to which the teeth are attached in the extremity, thus sometimes, and some veins are made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus sometimes, to which the teeth are attached thus as teeth of rescue in which they are incised and counter-indicated. Form of slight amputation:
Form of a hunchback having a spine:
Form of a hunchback having two spines:
Form of a splint having two extremities on which the head is abscessed:
Form of two wide splints:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied in the species of that and prepared by the artisans, as it is less irritating to their operation and more automatic for the men according to their quantity.
And you do not work with those instruments already, because it is necessary for those not to be exempted.
About the extraction of the secondina.
When the secondina is retained by the inflammation, then it is necessary that you command the bad humor to retain its own ale, and then make that stirring in condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if for thus it is deformed, well it is.
And then, you take a cup and pierce the cover with a tube and pause on those herbs under the mouth of the matrix, thus as calamint and rough and anet and camomile and scythed Arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of their essence being submerged in water in the cup, and pause that over the fire.
And then pause a cane tube of cane in the mouth of the matrix, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the matrix.
And then make that stirring thus as I have said, and the secondina will be forgotten in velocity.
Sometimes if the cure is not successful, then you command the matron that she submerges her left hand in oil of sisami or in a mixture of altaea, and then insert that into the jug and mix it with the secondina, and when that aura is found, then take it and extend it little by little. Sometimes if it is annexed to the prison of the matrix, then insert your hand according to what I have recommended, and when you have found the secondina, extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the matrix does not fall into vehement attraction. Beforehand, it is necessary that the right and left extremities are freed and facilitated.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constrained, we have not recommended the cure in sternutation and medication of the cup with herbs.
Sometimes if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, sometimes an emperor because that which is ejected from it to the mouth of the matrix lies in the space of the woman, and then crystallize that in enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve and be forgotten.
Sometimes when they are purified, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and at the stomach, and that leads to the bad humor; and then it is necessary that they be administered with sub-fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Sometimes some of the Ancients have experienced sub-fumigation of nitrot and dried figs.
Form of instrument in which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and of the secondina:
It is made from glass or from clay.
And the subtle extremity is paused in the jug and the wide extremity is over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused over the arms of the fire.
He holds that within which has been consumed by that sub-fumigation and another.
Of the care of the blind intestine of the non-perforated child.
Many children are born with intestines that are not perforated, which have subtle and obstructed ciphers. Then the midwife makes a perforation with her finger on that cipher; and if not, she perforates that narrow space with a silver instrument, and takes care not to touch the liver.
And then place a bandage over that swollen vein in a vie and oil; and then take care of that narrow channel within which it is seated.
You fear that it is obstructed, then pause in the tract a cannula for many days, and wait until the child wants to expel.
And then you happen to obstruct the intestine by consolidation of plague or of abscess; then the midwife sees that this consolidation is incised, and then it is cured with what we have said about the care and the lead.
Of the care of the fistulas that are produced below.
The fistulas that are produced in the lower part below the nodule and thickening, those which are produced near the intestine beforehand or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that node is old and corroded by the white or pungent humidity, and some vegetables grow from these fistulas, some penetrate.
And those penetrating are well-known for what is exuded from them through the exit and for wind-sitting; and some veins use the bad exit, and they are exuded from those worms.
And from those fistulas some vegetables grow in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and from those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the intestine and non-penetrating, it is that you put your finger therein into the intestine, and you find a subtle thread of iron or of ferrum in the fistula when it is not turbulent.
Perhaps in that which is turbulent, then you insert into that subtle thread of lead or of horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progress of the tract, nor any cause of egestion or worm or wind-sitting, thus as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then you turn to the care.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then the signification of it is the exuding of urine from that and prohibition of it until the place where medicine is consolidated.
Perhaps if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circle, then the sign of it is that the thread passes through here if it is not turbulent into the bone, and there is pain in the circle of the part; and that sometimes it produces pus; and that it is not worth in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with a narrow channel.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the care of them is troublesome and vain effort of foolish doctors over which it is established.
Perhaps in that which is not penetrating and not old, health is with iron spear spread according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been and profited.
And it is that the bad thing goes between your hands over the two fingers and raises the legs of it into them, the thighs are inclined towards its belly, and then you insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the turbulent fistula, until you know the place where the thread passes.
And if that feels the bad thing around the neck, then you see that you insert your finger therein into the neck.
And if you feel on your finger the thread already discovered penetrating, or what you feel between your finger and that sip or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then you do not trouble yourself with that, because it is not in that health, thus as we have said.
Perhaps some emperors made some things healthy in some homes where they are bitter.
And of the medicine for which you are hoping for youth in it, that is, you ignite subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, thus as it is prescribed, and you insert that ignited one into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then you iterate those two or three veins until you know that they are all adjusted, those flesh fistulas that seem like a feather of a bird.
And then you cure those that are enveloped in bandages until they can be seen, all those flesh that are adjusted, and then you cure with medicines the generating and consolidating flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the tendons are inserted, and do not penetrate into the thick tissue that is in the back of the knee, and between it and the tendon that is only a piece of flesh or cartilage, and sometimes the fistula forms on the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see that the tendon is dried, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the area where the extremity of the tendon is felt, and for the tendon is freed and separated.
And then carefully clean those festering wounds which are assembled at the edge of the painful canal and do not break any of those causes.
Perhaps it is necessary to flux many times what comes between you and your operation when you inject those wounds, then the thousand that will be and of the pus less sharp instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted wounds, and removal of the blood's excess moisture.
And then cure those wrapped up ulcers in bandage or in a trussed cause until the location gets better, and then cure the plague with a hard, engendering and consolidating flesh.
And these medicines are those that are stipulated and excess removed; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
Perhaps the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the back and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the thick tissue in the back and inquire about that.
And then if you feel the tendon and it is only cartilage or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on it unless according to a way of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you obtain the conquest of it so that it is possible to insert the lancet and cure it properly; and do not proceed with more section so that you do not insert the liquid content into the canal, and ascend over the patient's seat of judgment according to their will; or to elongate the cartilage and remove the pus that dries it until near the back, as we have said, or with a tendon or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then clean those festering wounds which are in the section until one can make a crust; and then strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the section, and if the horrific pus above is not consolidated, and breaks the fistula opened in the part of the back, and it will be less sharp for the patient. And the fistulas thus treated are finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tendon into the fistula, and it is in the thickness of the back around the surface of the body at the codena and in the margin of the back, then take the tendon of perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the holes according to this form.
and insert into that wrapped-up vein of five veins or around those; and then insert the tendon into the vein in the fistula until you obtain the conquest of it.
Perhaps it is penetrating into the margin of the back near the dent, then you extract the vein from that tract as if you insert the thick tissue in the back; and you extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when perhaps you insert the vein into the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh are inserted which are between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Perhaps the horrific fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not much in the groin, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not insert the lancet; and then make it until it is healed.
The form of the spine-shaped instrument is what is used to pierce the fistula: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not-sharp, so that you do not insert what is not necessary, sometimes.
Of the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows into the insertion of those.
Hemorrhoids are thus according to two methods, because either they are between the back resembling a cyst, or those are like a cluster of raspberries. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times and is one, and they are many, and they are outside the back, and in the extremities of it.
Perhaps those that are outside the back are according to the measure of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous flux, and thus according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is near the back is that you command the patient to sit and to exert themselves until the back becomes dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you touch them and suspend your fingers on one of those veins that you have on your nail, and then insert them deeply into the roots.
Perhaps the veins are not touched by them due to their humidity and softening, then take those in dry cloth or cotton or woolen cloth, and extract them from the tender tissues, and then insert them and powder over their hollow cavities with powdered caustics according to the insertion; or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cauterization. And then heal those with another cure until they are completely healthy.
And if the anus does not obey excretion, then create a small wound on the patient's back in the area where it is most tender, and wash them with that water that is in the vessel and that helps to facilitate excretion more easily when the patient is straining.
Perhaps the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, then their cause is ease, and it is that you take them with your nail, or take them with a vein, and insert them, and then heal them with water that we have said until they are completely healthy.
And to the one who has insertion, cover how you administer suture according to this manner: take a thread enveloped and pass it through a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelop the two extreme ends of the thread on the part below the needle, and thus latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then remove the thread and extract the needle.
And make all into one, and leave only one of those and not touch it, so that the superfluity of the blood flow can run from that.
And then pause on the anus, dripping infused oil or cerate; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then leave it there until it falls off; and when it is cast out, heal those with an unguent or another cure until they are healthy.
And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, then cover how you root them out with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they are made humid and held back by the scab, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then you dig them out with a vehement root until the first layer, so that much blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are healthy.
You know that abscesses are clear, and it is not so unless you notice a red swelling according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and toes, and they come from those painful humors.
And then it is necessary that you insert something that is in the circle of the abscess, and hold it with forceps or with a vein, and eradicate it from its root; and then heal it.
And if you want, cauterize the second option that is described in the seventh chapter.
Perhaps a wart is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and soft words are spoken to the hands of infants.
And the treatment of it is that you extend and insert it, or that you strengthen it with a thread or a hair until it falls off. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
Perhaps a formica is a small, rough, or fistula-like growth on the surface of the body next to the thigh, and when it touches that, it is sent into the likeness of mordification of ant-form, and it is made around the body.
And the treatment of it is that you take a needle of hawk's claw or of vulture's claw, and make it strong, and place it on the formica until it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of the body; and then revolve your hand with the needle until you insert what is in the circuit of the formica, and place it in the thigh of the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you want, make it with a needle of iron or of steel according to this form:
The part below the needle handle has subtlety, being unperforated, enveloped so that on the said day the apprehension of it is abolished and the revolution of it.
And if you want, cauterize the formica according to what has been previously said in the chapter on cauterization of atheyl.
In the manner of instruments that are administered to give Christ's cross.
Some crosses are made of silver or gold or copper or tin; and some are made of small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are fragile or delicate, the crosses of these should be small.
The form of large and few crosses:
The head of the tube is underneath, where the bag is tied, and it should be at a distance from where the bag is tied, just as one does at times.
And the extremity of the tube that is inserted into the buttock should be smooth (not rough) like a lion, subtly entering; and on one side of the tube there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the size of the roots and thus a small one becomes larger.
And the bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin are put, and its length should be a palm.
And it should be perforated for many channels, just as it is revolving; and if the space that is between the channels is too large, the size of the finger.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of two or three threads, or around them; and adjust it to the bag; and when you have put it in, it should be stretched at the head of the cross between two distinct and strongly constricted points, and then cross it on each channel: The quality of crossing is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and elevate their legs upwards and place one cushion over which you have already put the homes or a lancet; and take an extremity of the cautery oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and insert that in the buttock to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it with two fingers and evacuates everything that is in the intestine until it is evacuated from the cross; and then remove the cross and the patient raises their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, hold it as much as you can; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it is better in the morning for his recovery.
Better if you cross them in the treatments of solution of stomach and evacuation of the intestine, then you iterate the cautery until it is healthy.
And if in the buttock there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses, then the cross should be subtle and gentle, like the crosses with which children are treated.
On the treatment of ulcers.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of ulcers what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with me and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that ulcers are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the location on which they occur.
And the causes why many ulcers are made are thus, like a blow of stone, or incision of space, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a dart, or similar to those of many causes.
Better the ulcers that are in the locations of the body thus, like an ulcer that eats on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some ulcers because it pauses that rationalization and rule about the other ulcers.
And I will begin with simple ulcers of the head, because the remembrance of the compositions will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple ulcer on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow of stone or similar, and it has already wounded the scalp so much and it is a great ulcer and there are fears about that patient having an abscessed apostema caut, then you should amputate the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract it according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibitive cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is evacuated from the ulcer is little.
And it should be phlebotomy of the contrary part of the affected ulcer; and beware of the patient's relapse and of veined and gross veins.
Better to prohibit any cause from the minute, then it should be diminished of the vein and not approach flesh nor veins.
And stop on the ulcer, if it has abscessed apostema caut, cut into the oil rose solute or in the vein in which it is stipulated.
But it is certain that the abscess has burst, then stop on the wound, if recently you have seen healthy blood and air which have not mixed with that dust which you recommend to remove little by little.
And if the air has already mixed with that, then stop on the affected area until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or is due to a gap in the skin and of similar things, and not all the lips of it are adjusted for small stitches, then adjust them under the suture as you recommend for their suture.
But if the wound has discovered the bone and pen, and it is not retained by it except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply careful treatment to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of cartilage, and command the patient to be moderate in their diet: avoid fatty foods and form similar things, until it is composed.
And if you find rottenness in the cartilage and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that putrid matter and remove it, and apply proper treatment to that.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which healthy blood may flow, and it is not absorbed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that one not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, you provoke that which we have said does not congeal, then you cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way you dust over those with that powder, so that it consolidates before the air touches them.
And the preparation of the powder is this: take one part of oil of iris, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of unextinguished fire; grind everything thoroughly and crush it, and fill the wound with it, and constrict it with good constriction until it adheres to that place, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And apply strength to that from below with poultices and lift it, and do not disturb it while it is like this so that it is not burst open, because it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healed.
And some old woman makes that solo remedy, when there is no iris and dragon's blood present.
And thus this method of operation is suitable for large wounds when it is convenient to stop on those and they are straight, and the recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer, then do not intend to apply this powder, but rather take care of those with what we have said, in this way you stop on those affected areas of the belly, or you stop on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purged; and apply proper treatment to them with another cure until they are healed.
But if you find a fracture wound in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
And you direct the treatment of fractures of the head according to what is coming next.
Of the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its origin but rather evaded cure with what makes vehement stipulation, thus as ziniar and zegi say that it is vetriol and similar to them because no others among the nerves contradict it. And do not stop on the wound for any total fracture, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the source of all the members.
And if it is what is cured by gentle medicines, thus as it is caused by washing with warm water, some veiled infusion in rose oil or non-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with warm water and the other minor wounds are treated according to this manner, and humitz affected areas.
But if the wound is large, then administer suture, or stitch the lips of it, and apply proper treatment to that with poultices until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the body, then pierce that in the place most prone to putrefaction.
But if in the wound an artery is incised and a flow of blood is achieved, then stop or ligate that, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke that.
But if you have incised the vertebrae of the spine or all, and thus saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the cartilage with suture on the canal of the spine and do not touch that; before equalizing that and reducing it to its natural figure, and apply proper strength to that in decent structure, and lift that for several days; and apply proper treatment to that with affected areas where stipulation and excitement occur until it is healed.
If the plague has already entered the bone to cause decay, then perceive it, and if there is a fragment of bone in it, extract all that you can from it; and what you do not apprehend, let it enter into the plague so that it may be separated and the essence of the bone may be alleviated.
And if the plague is recent, then powder over it with the powder that you have recommended. If the plague has made a fistula, then cure it with that which the memory of the wound will bring to you in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of the lance or of the collarbone, and sometimes of its depth, then consider that if the plague has come with ventosity when the patient was healthy; then you will know that the plague is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the seventh vein, then you pause on it at the first hour with powder, and do not strenuously rub that which is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and revives the patient, rather pause on it with an attractive poultice, and remove those two evacuating veins daily.
And if the poultice is not at your disposal, then pause on the orifice of the plague with a cloth very much so that it sucks out what comes from the humidities; and make the patient sleep on the plague so that it corrects what is in it.
If the plague has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of ale, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the plague is saved; and then cure it with calves and other curative entreates until it is healed.
If the healing of it is excessive, and already all time has been opened, then you will know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
And if the plague is by incision of the spine or of the collarbone, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with what has been preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has made decay in the bone, and its roots are deep, then you twist the plague and try to extract those roots, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then let them enter so that the plague may be alleviated, for their extraction is alleviated.
And of the other plagues occurring in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition which affects the belly is either great, or small, or mediocre.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introgression of them at the seventh place so quickly, because it becomes gross and is engrossed, for which the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the moderate disruption is mediocre, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, thus as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you will know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that concur in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other plagues, but in this way they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Then I say that when the plague is small and it has some cause of the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has come into inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
And then when it is so, then you will know that you should scale it in this way that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you cook in water with cypress, and spices, and embrocations with that to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And some evacuations make it go in which it has stipulated, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And then when the inflammation is resolved, then you will humidify the intestine with water in which there are caught altaea and malva, because by that the instrument of it is alleviated with little cause.
If the instrument of it is excavated near this cure, then you will know that the disruption is cut with a small instrument in which there are inserted emollients.
And the primary cure is better, when it is apparent that it does not fail, and there should be no occupation to fail, nor need for further treatment.
Take away the instrument, see to the shape of it:
One part of the sharp twisted, and the other not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of space, unless it has been obtused a little.
And then when the plague is amplified and goes beyond the intestine, then it's necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form of it, in its own proper place, if possible, because better is.
Moreover when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it's necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus that their head may be raised; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you raise the head of it and the feet thus that the parts below are relieved.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then direct your attention and consideration to that time, so that the part where the plague is may be more elevated than the other.
And thus it's necessary that you administer this in great plagues and in lesser plagues.
And in the small plagues, place what is prepared for you, and make it so that the minister is between your most affected fingers, which holds the entire disruption in its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and make it clear to him from whom the suture comes, or some other cause.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts the threads according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then you pass the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the thread once, so that you do not insert faith in the two extremities of the code, as are the two extremities of the ciphac which is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have added the two extremities of the code and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so you form four orders.
And then tighten with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some gathered from two parts together, and then add the two lips to the plague for decent addition; and then you pass the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then you tie it with double faith as you did with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the plague.
And thus the lesser needles are between thickness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move more easily into the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entry into the code, and therefore it's necessary that they be subtle in subtlety and thickness.
And it's not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extremities of the code near each other, so that the flesh is not easily pierced and the plague is healed before its consolidation.
And there should not be prolonged sutures, lest the plague be prohibited from consolidation.
And then you insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not let out the evil humour from their own dormier; and you place powders expanded over the entire suture, which holds the extremities of the needles; and then you leave them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles are thus more convenient in small plagues, because they have need of a single needle or two or around them.
Moreover the second suture is common: and it is that you administer a suture with four extremities, of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, in one gathering, with a needle in which faith is enveloped in subtlety and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same part of the code from which it began, so that the faith retracts with the pus from the underlying part to the plague, so that the suture is according to the suture of a draw with which the draws are strengthened.
And place between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the smaller finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I cured the plague that had afflicted a man in his belly, which had been wounded by a blow, and was a disruption of the major plague of one palm, and was an ulcer around two palms of the intestine from the middle place, and was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced it after the intestine had been outside the plague for 23 hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I visited him for many years, and he is conversing in his own dispositions.
And other doctors have judged that there is no health; and by miraculous power, because you do not cure anything in the way of an ointment, because it was in a place where the ointment did not penetrate nor any medicine, but rather stayed on the surface of the ulcer for many days, and continually abluted with water of honey until it became healthy.
Perhaps you direct two special species of sutures properly according to the narrative of Pareula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and meanwhile insert a needle from the front part to the back part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the tendon and in that same moment it reaches the extremity of the finger in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the hand.
And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extremity of the hand from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the finger that is in this state, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity of the hand from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate there your penetration, which you make penetrate in the finger at the extremity of the mirror that is in the part of the hand until all that penetrates.
And then begin from this same moment to sew up the extremity that is of the finger on the other side, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then return it to its place in the tendon, and sew up the extremity of the finger that is on the other side at this same extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the tendon which is part of the hand.
And make it one way and another, and make it one way until you collect all that is in front of you according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you collect a suture of pellicles in which you collect the skin, and thus you collect the finger one way from the part of the extremity of the tendon, and leave another way until it is completed.
Perhaps the second special species of suture proper, which is called Gualia's method, and this is to be preserved for the sake of the wound and recommended by it, that you collect it according to similarity in which doctors usually collect it, thus adding all parts to their corresponding parts convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity, and that is done according to what you have been recommended.
It seems that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own part of the front, and make it penetrate to the back part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the finger; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the finger.
And then revolve those circles, and make them penetrate certain parts of the back to the front in two extremities of the mirror, which are not in the contrary side.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned in remembrance.
This is Gualia's method.
And perhaps the doctors said, the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these a certain thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from what is due to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who collect the intestines together.
And you know that when a disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Perhaps the judgment of medical treatment of ulcers is a judgment of the other ulcers.
Which cause is because when you congregate the recent ulcer with the healthy skin beneath, and reduces the intestine and collects it and adapts it decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the ulcer, then pause over those gathered doctors who are present until they make a hard and strong scar, and consolidate finger and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the curing of other ulcers until it is healthy.
Perhaps if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that for a short time, because it begins to get worse, and ablutes much, and changes those two applications per day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositions when the ulcers are simple.
Perhaps if you fear that the ulcer will spread to the principal members, then it seems that you submerge the lanolin in oil of tempered quality, or in rosated oil, and pause there in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and joints.
If there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, because many matters are accumulated there, then crystallize that bitter medicine into a stipated black powder, and majorly if the perverting humor is pervaded in the intestine and it makes a penetrating exit from its cavity.
We know that the one that is of the large intestine is of less urgency to heal than the one that is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gégénou" does not receive healing from the plague that falls into it all at once; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and to its magnitude, and to the subtlety of its body, and to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Perhaps what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and consequently that recent one reduces it according to your direct method in which you reduce the intestines in a gathered way.
Perhaps it has passed into the space and already becomes green or black, then when you stretch that faithful finger over the area that is denigrated by it, in order to bring fluxes of blood, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then you insert that which is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the faithful finger pending on the part below the plague foro, so that above your finger is alleviated the attraction of the fabric and emission of the arm from the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they settle in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the ventral region with percussion of the lancet and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and it was due to its gestation and ventosity.
Then you thought about the cure of it, since it was not confided in its healing, maybe you should subtly enter that which focuses on sanitizing and the area is consolidated.
And you thought that you saw the area already consolidated, then you thought about the patient who encountered evil on the accident of bad in their ventral region; and they did not encounter any remedy for that bad accident and remained in their many miserable dispositions mangling and lamenting, and then they entered into a bath and it was exercised in their sayings.
And already they showed some experimented people that when the plague enters the intestine, and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this method: and it is that you take grains of big capsules; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and pause a capsule of those that has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; thus when you take hold of it and stretch your mouth, it separates the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another capsule for the first method, and do not cease from making capsules in one way according to the quantity of all the plague.
And then reduce that and thus the plague; and those capsules remain annexed in the intestine until the intestine is sanitized; and it does not harm the patient with any nuisance.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with faithful subtle thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, because it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it should not be descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of the beast, enveloping, and then insert that thread into needles and thus into that intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suture with capsules is not based on anything but trust and hope.
Perhaps the plague is great and ample, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not but subtlety, and there is no healing of it altogether.
Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
We know that all plague and aposteme when they become evil and ancient, and it makes an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets worse over time and does not abscind, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a nodulous, hard, white abscess which does not hurt and in which there is conquest as it is conquered by the pain of ausel; and thus it is named alcus rizatz, that is, pain.
And it is in some humid homes which gets worse; and strongly the humidity is abscinded in some hours. And some accumulated humidity is moist, and it is few, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of their loves with medicines in division.
And thus you will know how to cure a fistula, which is made by way of operation in hand.
And you know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; because some are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the composite joints made up of the hand and foot; and of those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
And thus those fistulas that are according to this manner are of the difficult-to-heal diseases, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with it is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is one of the deep-seated fistulas that does not penetrate to those places that I said, and you hope and trust in its cure, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you acquire it with a remedy.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead probe, because lead follows the lightness of the body and is alleviated and cured of the twist.
And if the fistula has very horrible matters, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Then crystallize the horrific matters through their horrific openings, because the humidity by which you crystallize it goes from the other horrific openings and corrects them.
And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula that has very horrific matters and this is all about your total strength, in your entire introspection, in which you introspect the disease, and the invention of the pain from your compression on the hand over the place, and similarly to the significations and accidental causes of the aposteme.
And since you have stood upon all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which you have said.
Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the horrific openings of the flesh, or of the will and similarly, and cure it from within so that it may be healed.
But if the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is straight, then you will see that you insert it in the preceding wound as much as possible, and then Mondify it from all its corrupt flesh; and then administer some enveloped medicines acutely, and introduce them into the conquest of the fistula, which has been comprehended in steel.
And do it so that some of the medicines enter into the acute medicine that corrodes all that which is rough in the conquest of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it so that it joins with those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is certified by you, then you should inquire into it and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that within so that the corruption may be stopped entirely; and then cure it so that it may be healed.
And if it is not healed and casts off its arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover again with second thought and exquisitely make the reason of it and the mundification of it in the last strong fortitude, and then restore it.
And so if it is healed, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the long-standing profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and then to you in that case it is not generated but only laid aside.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract it, then you attract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
And if there are many bones, then you make the extraction of all those with great care, and of those that do not leave any cause in your strength.
But if you have made opposition to some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then you dissect those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
If you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause on the plague that can corrupt the plague, and place it inside so that it is in the environment of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and be constricted by the section that you have incised in your operation.
Having, if you fear, pause on the submerged cord situated above three olive oils, or the submerged cord in Egyptian anguents, or in some of the green vertebrae, because when those ligaments are purified, and the bones are separated from their abrasion, and those attractions are alleviated.
But if it is a large bone, similarly to the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so much alone, then scrape away that matter so much alone from the back into order to be freed from that blackness and corruption, and then restore the plague.
But if that which of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to incise entirely into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you advise a man to go to his thigh for that, pause on that and assist and adjust over your operation.
A young man of around thirty years, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the affected parts, the putrid matter is about the matter that has penetrated the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of great apostema, and I do not find an extrinsic cause.
And then I found that the time was extended for the error of the doctors until the apostema was hidden, and I corrected the putrid matter, and its cure was paused until the leg was fistulated, and it seemed to be in the morbid words which all got purification and the humidity of the body.
And then many doctors gathered around for two years, and I did not find any of them who knew more in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the leg of that man and the matters that were running from it, those morbid things for a large body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those morbid things and reached the probe to the bone.
And then I probed and scrutinized all the morbid things and tried to bring them to their proper place of all parts of the leg.
And then I cut and incised around one of those morbid things until I discovered a part of the bone, and I unearthed that corrupted thing, and already it was terrible and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the leg was corrupted until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I cleared away what was discovered by me and prepared the bone that was uncovered.
And I judged that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and cleared away, and I had already destroyed.
And then I paused the restoration of the plague with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I reiterated and uncovered again on the bone secondarily upon the primary discovery, and I found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I cleared away what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I did perforate to make the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered about the other vein and did not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perforate for the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted from the marrow itself, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated gradually and healed.
And it was not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and its section except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because it happened at all hours by excess evacuation without a bad syncopy.
And thus it was healed entirely, and nothing remained in the place of the hard flesh; and it was well disposed in its own body and returned to its virtue; and it was conversed into its dispositions and did not oppose anything in ambulation nor harmed in any cause.
If it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already treated, then take care that you succeed in this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it to the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend to its own; and pause that ligament of wool, thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it above the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw per that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And stop putting tables under them decently, because when you do that it's not prohibited to saw the rotten flesh.
And cover the sawing over the rotten small area little by little, because if it's in the cavity of the rotten bone and doesn't appear in its appearance to the senses, and strengthen the sawing on the other visible side.
And if the bone is rotten and doesn't show, it's because one continuous part is in the other, and the rot is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the entire flesh of all parts; and stop putting tables under, and stop sawing that first part where the rot is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And do the sawing according to the place of the rot a little, as we have said.
And if the rot is in the joint, cut into that rotten joint, and saw the bone where it connects to the other part.
And if the rot is in the connection of two joints, then it's not in its reason but in the ingrown.
And if the rot is in the thickness of the hand or foot, it's very difficult; however, cover so that you inquire into the rot in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you grasp it, and remove it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and meanwhile the ingrown may be rectified to you, when it doesn't make a contrary vein or nerve.
And you know that incisions and saws are made to cut these bones which are very thick according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare a whole species of convenient operation and instrument for that operation.
And you know that this operation depends on you regarding the species of instrument which you need; when you are great study and long and conversant with the manners of this art, and witness of manners of illnesses, because then you have them for yourself to put in order what is convenient to the entire illness.
And you will be forming in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will need, and which will seem simple to you, as they proceed with your prohibition, which you will experience about the others. Form of sawing:
Form of another sawing:
Form of another large sawing:
Form of a razor: The head of this razor is according to the form of a star-shaped claw, and its points are according to the form of pointed almonds.
And it's not suitable unless you confide in that razor the heads of the joints when they are rotten, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another sawing done decently: it's made with an arc of the foot above and the sharpness of iron, and the member of the foot below is decently made. Form of it:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another curved razor at the extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a probe:
Form of another smaller incision instrument:
Form of another incision instrument; this resembles a razor, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a razor that is suitable for the ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and of sharp point.
And it's made of iron from India, and similarly you cover all the causes that we have said about razors and incision instruments and saws.
About incision extremities and the sawing of bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that rot with the cure of those medicines and the cure doesn't conform, or sometimes the rot goes to the member which doesn't perceive any cause, then it's necessary that you cut off that member up to where the honor accuses the rot, so that the evil escapes through death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member becomes black up to where it seems that fire has burned, or it's weakened near the blackness up to where the weakness takes hold in that member and it seizes the entire body; and thus you will have cut off that one with an incision.
And similarly, if it's a cause of rot from venomous causes, such as those of the maritime scorpion or of the viper or of the rhutel and similar things.
If the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you insert the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
Likewise if it reaches the hand, then you insert that part of the focus of the funnel, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the funnel of the arm.
And if you enclose that, then insert the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond the elbow and surrounds the joint, then at that point is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause in the treatment is a quantity of virtue.
Likewise, it is done with the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you insert that up to one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you insert the whole foot. Maybe it will enter into the tooth, then you insert the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
And the manner of inserting the limb or of cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part below where you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the lower parts, and extend the minister another ligament upwards; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in the same space until everything is discovered; and then it is inserted or cut.
And take care that a drop of oil is placed on all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's adjusted lesion and aposteme are cautious.
Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the affected area carefully, or place some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the afflicted limb with a ligament at a convenient time, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his own foot, this kind of accident which you and I have recommended, which is because the blackness in the foot was assembled for combustion of fire.
And that corruption happens primarily in the own toe until it reaches the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself for such a remedy because he sees the cure coming to his limb with the violence of it, and the intestine is inserted into the foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
Long time ago that corruption happened in the finger of my hand indicated.
And then I came to myself, and so I began to reflect on that superfutility which was placed above the hand of medicines, and then the purification of the body; and it is not reflected, the superfutility begins to go into the other finger until it begins in the hand.
And I began to insert my hand into it, and I did not want to do anything expecting a reflection on that superfutility, and maybe I feared the insertion of the hand of death, because the virtue of the patient was above caution.
And since he disappeared from me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and inserted his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be an aid on what is said about this illness, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
About the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is drained from there, and the area is washed with vinegar as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above there as a subtle drip, and no corruption has occurred afterwards, and no harm is done to the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and not named a fistula.
Maybe however the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in certain members, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that you insert the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and mainly when it is subtily drained and done with a drip, and you make sure that it does not adhere to the area for its corruption.
Maybe you hope that the cord adheres and that corruption has not been achieved by further consequence, and in the cord it has happened from a good direction, then you cure him with a cleansing.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is great, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then cleanse him with Egyptian medicine made from oil and wine and juniper, which receives equal parts, and are adjusted in a vessel, and are placed over the fire until the medicine is red-hot and penetrates to the affected part.
And you take of the water that is necessary and dissolve it in warm water and honey; and cleanse the wound with that, and strengthen the orifice of it, and apply the medicine to it for two hours' quantity.
And you extract that mixture with precision; and do it for so many days until the wound is purified and the putridity is removed.
And some vegetables are cleansed with warm water of ash, when it is not present to you this medicine; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse the wound until you confirm that the wound is healthy.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then cleanse the wound with warm water and honey, and mix zinc oxide and triple-distilled water, and cleanse the wound with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and the wine makes it adhere to the wound, and it increases when the wine has been superfluously distilled and dried.
And when you do some vegetables and you confirm that the wound is already healed, then cleanse it with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of a dyaphinicon ointment and dissolve it in oil rosated with wine stiptic; or that you cleanse with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the wound is strait in which the cannula of the syringe is not received, then you amplify it with a small iron little by little, and pause in the caldera enveloped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is large, then you add the lips of it to suture and release its quantity in which the syringe enters with additions.
And if the orifice of it from which the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower place where it is in the pus, because the arm runs until below, for when the arm is constricted in the proximity of the wound the flesh is engendered there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the wound until around the pus below according to your will, then you prepare the member with preparation for which the arm runs more lightly according to what is apparent to you and that no cause of the arm is retained.
Moreover, that which is over the orifice of the wound, which you remove at all hours so that it adjusts to the arm. And so that you know if that which runs from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested.
And also you consider the place of that wound, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is poured over the orifice of the wound already adheres, or it acquires adherence, then you may detach it on the third day, and when you detach the plague, then you change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Moreover, if from the wound you extract a subtle virus, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of it is acquired, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in those plague wounds, and of those which are done contrary to it.
And if from the wound you extract many days an indigested arm, then you know that the wound does not adhere; and if the adherence of the wound is delayed and it is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in exsiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried also as ointment dyaphinicon, when it is superfluously adjusted with additions of zegi.
And the last medicine that is curative, is that you take of ointment dyaphinicon and it is dissolved in rosated oil, and it is over the voyat vi, an antique ointment in its substance, and then you confirm that with it, and use it for that.
And thus it is similar in that action, when there is no arm, ointment dyaphinicon, honey which is cooked until it is thickened, and use it for that; or take myrrh and aloen and incense, and triturate all and pulverize over the honey which is under the focus, and then line it over the cloth and strengthen it over the wound; and line it with the honey which has been cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize over the cloth and strengthen it.
And certain evacuated medications are administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and it is celestial lilies) and powder of errors and centauries, and use of those simple or adjusted, trituring them and sprinkling over the honey that has been recommended; and remove the excess from it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed through this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the prone part of it, and already has inquiry in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you heal with a fistular cure, just as it is said below.
Of the cure of gouty and worn-out nails and toes, and additional incision of fingers and sectioning.
Gouty is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the hand or foot, and it forms in other fingers as well, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less frequent, or it is abscessed by cauterization, or it is corrupted, and it throws out a branch that corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it pervades its corruption to the bone within so that it has a fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes dark.
And so when you have that water which we have said in the division and it does not confluence with your cure, then you should remove all the superfluity that has grown on the nail and cauterize the wound properly, because excessive cautery is not helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail grow back, they take hold in the flesh at the divided parts, and begin to pierce and sting, then you should pause and remove subtly beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and impel it upwards and incise that flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn until it is totally removed; and properly cure that wound so that it may be healed.
But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you should remove the bone and extract it, for no time is wasted when the corrupted bone is in.
And if the corrosion and corruption go into the finger, then you incise it in one of the nodes according to what is prescribed for its removal, and properly cure that so that it may be healed.
But if the nail is subject to percussion or attrition, and it is in that vehement pain, then you should begin to fleubotomize the patient, and properly section the nail with a spatula-shaped instrument above just below, and be careful that the sectioning does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the patient's vehement pain, and it will cause the production of superfluous flesh in the location; and properly cure that place so that it ceases to hurt.
But that which is adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, is entirely flesh, and entirely in the bones, or entirely in the nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in certain nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born in the joints is entirely bad.
And of those that are fleshy growths, the sectioning is easier, and it is necessary to incise them with a broad spatula at their root.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscess.
But in that which is born on the fingers with nodes, you should incise at the beginning of the flesh with a round incision into the bone, and properly serrate it with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and properly cure that so that it may be healed.
But consolidation occurs when the fingers are immobile between the mota (motions?) exhausted or due to nativity of the man who is thus, or for consolidation of the wound or for combustion of fire, or for similarity, therefore you should section that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And properly pause between the draps of the enfuzes (enfuzes? perhaps "swellings"?) in oil rose per that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate them, or pause among them with a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in certain fingers at the palm, then you section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of vices, they are varied.
Vices are varied, and they are enveloped by thick, full veins of melancholic superfluities which come into motion in the members of the body, and the greatest advent occurs in the legs, and increases in the legs of travelers and laborers and porters.
Therefore you should administer purging of the body from black bile certain evacuated medications with strong expulsion, and properly bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
The treatment of iron fever is according to two methods: one is that the black blood is extracted and eliminated, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all the bad blood is removed.
The sectioning of the leg is according to this method: from the beginning, apply a warm compress with hot water until the thick blood is dissolved, which makes the leg feculent, and then strongly bind the patient's thigh at the joint above the knee, with a bandage in one place, or two, or three places, as needed for sectioning; and then raise the black blood to the top of the leg from the bottom, and from below, until the desired quantity is released, which will alleviate the patient's virtue.
And then leave it there, and order them to abstain from eating black bitter foods that generate black bile.
And continue the treatment for phlebotomy when the veins are full and the patient does not respond to the medication.
The elevation of the legs is according to this method: you raise the patient's leg, if there are many pulses, and then place them in a bath and apply a warm compress to the leg with hot water until it becomes engorged and the veins are overflowing; or exercise strongly, if a bath is not present at your location, until the member is scalded.
And then puncture the codeina at the right of the vein for sectioning in the groin or in the back of the patient's leg, or at the lowest part of the patient's leg near the ankle.
And then uncover the codeina with an unguent and scratch the vein from every part until it appears to the sense, and it is often the experience of those who usually decline into blackness.
And then when you evacuate and remove the codeina, you will see that white matter which was cord-like.
And then place below the royal treatment until it is elevated and removed from the codeina, and suspend it with an unguent or a lion's oil.
And then make another sectioning at that sectioning for three days, and then scratch the codeina from the bottom of the vein until it appears.
And then raise it and insert it into the back sectioning of the ankle, and then extract it and raise it until it is released through the second sectioning, and then extract it from the sectioning that is above it.
And do it until you extract it from the sectioning that is above or outside of all the sectionings, until everything is released; and then insert it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and raise, then introduce a strong double-edged needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce the royal treatment below and rotate your hand over all parts until it is grasped. And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to raise the limb and it will come back over the patient's leg due to the inflammation.
And when all the humors are evacuated, then pause over the place of the open wound, anointed with wine and oil, and rosated and non-rosated oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is constricted and has twisted around which is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then be aware that you should make an effort over all the twisted parts of it and the places of its envelopment, and then suspend it with an unguent until it elevates the whole.
And beware of your sectioning that does not insert the vein and does not touch it, because it will be difficult for you to raise it; and preserve your prudence in that.
The form of the incident is what has been sectioned life:
It is not to be applied thus with the unguents nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not touch the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would insert into the vein by its subtlety; having excess in superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on hot and dry lands, just like Atégé in Arabic lands and in the dry and barren lands of India, where there is little fertility and in which there are neither herbs nor plants.
And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
And the gesture of it is of putrefaction that sees below the codeina, just like venomous snakes and worms and scorpions and worms generating between the codeina and the flesh.
And the signal of the suspicion of its advent is from this vein that causes inflammation violently in the leg; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to have roots like a plant.
And then it appears from there to the extremity, then you should cover with a piece of lead the weight of one dram, between two drams, and remove that and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
And many times with eyes on some cause of the previous parts, wrap that in lead and apply it. And if the motion is prolonged, then you inject a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not inject that with a sharp instrument before it has been purified, because if you inject it, it becomes contrary and enters into the flesh and causes aposteme and putridity in the area and bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely eliminated from the rear of it and does not remain any cause in the body.
And from this vein it is extracted in some men who are in their length of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have arrived at a point where I extracted one of 20 palms.
And if it is injected at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the channel of it and perforate that long channel in the body, until everything that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and afterwards cure it by curing apostemes.
And in this vein some times there are many ramps, and it increases especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to its many horrific roots, and it is extracted from each horrific root.
And thus cure it in this way as we have said in the division and with that which has been said above.
On the treatment of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease because many times it comes from the cattle and it is a worm that is born between the gut and the flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, weakening and debilitating, and shows the sentiment of those who have it, member by member, until it disintegrates the gut and exits.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids to be born in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the whiteness, then it fortifies the vein in it and destroys the whiteness, and that comes from many times.
And thus when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done if not with the careful ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it in lamentation and strong constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract it.
And if it is implanted in the flesh and does not leave, then you pause cautery fire over the area until it dies, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it in the place where it corrupts the area as we have said.
Perhaps you have seen that thing reaching the head near the whiteness, then strengthen over the eyebrow with a strong structure, and afterwards dry over it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use medications evacuating bad putrid humors, and beware of evil generations generating putrefaction.
On the treatment of na fir disease.
This disease is named in our land as na fir, and it is pain which comes into some members, and afterwards it spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been massaged for an hour, I saw that inflammation going away just as the venom was being drawn out, more quickly than it would have been if it were silver, thus I knew when it corrodes from place to place.
And then I placed it in the pain of that place and fixed it in the muscle, and afterwards I stayed there for an hour.
And afterwards I ran to the other body until I reached the other arm.
And afterwards I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body thus as I saw; and I was very marveled at the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And I had already seen that in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many which eliminate pain by being permuted from member to member. But I did not see it in the veins as in the woman.
And I did not think it was that thing unless it was because the woman was old, and her body was dry and her veins were discovered, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that venom is permuted.
And it is necessary that it not appear according to this retro-action in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with veins that are close together.
When you want to cure the patient, and they feel that pain, then it is not apparent to you as it has been said, then you strengthen over that and remove the ligament from there, and burn the area with a hot iron, and cauterize the place where the constricted wind has settled.
Perhaps you do not often see those evil humors, then you cure the excess of the body and that which expels wind, and burn those foul pills of filth and serpent-like things.
From the extraction of sage.
Sages are diversified according to species, and according to the places of the body where they occur, because their diversity is that of those with large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and rough ones, so they are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with astellas.
And of the sensations of the brain it is when you cut into the sage, and cross the bone, and it is said by the physician that which is above the brain, because it accelerates through the violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and very strong it is absconded the speech and it is destroyed the voice, and it is said by the place of the plague humid white matter resembling a palsy, and you see similar things in the flesh.
And so if you appear with these sensations, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the sage, unless it is not outside.
Perhaps the sensations of the sage when you cut into the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel as if it were fixed in a hard cause, and not a vain cause; and very strong the movement of the sage is similar to the movement of a palsy, and it runs with the plague black sanc, and it is that friigidity of the extremities, and sudden fainting, and syncope; and so you know that death descends from all that you have taken.
And the sensations when the sage has infected the lung, then it is said to be of spumous sanc from the plague, and the veins that are near the colon so apostematize, and the color of the patient is changed, and they expire a great spirit, and demand attraction of fresh air.
And if you cut into the sage in the veilment that is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made with great anguish and vehement pain and suspicion, and not all the members of the muscles are moved.
And if you cut into the sage in the stomach, then very strong it is seen that the plague is wandering with some indigestion.
And if you cut into the sage in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, it is seen that there is some crack of the plague, or the web, or hernia which is disordered, and there is no hope in the cure of the extraction of the sage.
And if the sage cuts into the bladder, and it is said to be before urine, and it processes some cause in the parts before, and very strong it is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Perhaps the other members are thus as the face, the colon, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjutants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg and their similar ones among the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the sage does not touch a vein nor an artery and it is not a poisonous sage.
And you recompose that which you have seen of the essence of these sages, because they signify for that above the cure of your tie.
Which cause is, because in one house the sage falls into the lacrimal of the eye of the patient in the root of the nose, and you extract it from the other part, leaving the grayish humor of the patient, and it is healed, and does not happen in the eye of the patient anymore.
And you extract another sage from a Jew who fell into it in the gray of his eye, behind the eyelid and further, and the sage was hidden and not achieved except for a small extremity that adhered to the eye's foundation, and it was a great sage among the sharp sages of the Turks, like a fierce lion in which there were no humors.
It seems that the patient is in a crisis, and does not fall into a bad crisis.
He extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into the gutter, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that which he had swallowed; and then he inserted his finger over that between two guidons, and already it was submerged in the gutter of the man; and then he very subtly felt for it, and managed to extract it, and the Christian man was healed.
He extracted another arrow from a man whose stomach had fallen into his own abdomen, and he thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since the wound had passed thirty days and did not improve because of any of its natural dispositions, he inserted his finger over the arrow and managed to remove it, and he was healed, and did not fall into a bad accident.
I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated over him, and since he had been sitting for about seven years, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
I saw a woman in whom an arrow had fallen into her abdomen, and the wound was consolidated inside her, and it did not improve with her natural dispositions, and the woman did not receive nourishment from any of her natural operations.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had fallen into his face and the wound was consolidated, and it broke off the arrow, not causing much pain, and many signs seemed to indicate that he would recover.
He extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which had fallen into the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
He was called to cure him by extracting the arrow within three days.
And then he felt the wound of the arrow very slightly; and then he inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but he felt it a little below the right shoulder, and then he suspected that this point was due to the extremity of the arrow.
And he applied a plaster to the place where it was attractive and digestive, trusting in me that the place would be restored because it appears to me as the place of the arrow, so that it succeeds over that.
And it did not fall into a significant accident place where the arrow had reached that spot; and he continued to apply the plaster over him for many days without an accident; and the wound was consolidated meanwhile, and the pain of the extraction ceased from him within many days until one day I felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized it again.
And then he paused over the acute corrosive medicinal wound for many days until it was opened, and with a subtle touch he felt that, and extracted the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the flesh.
And he then adjusted the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I spent time on that for a period of time within four months.
And then since the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into him, and I remained there, and did not obey the judgment, then he did not cease subtly to ingratiate and contrive about that in many ways of artifice, until he began one day about that in many ways of artifices, pending he would hold it with forceps decently made, according to what will be seen at the end of the chapter, until he extracted it; and then he restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and he restored it and the wound was consolidated, and he was entirely healed by his whole sanity, and did not return to him in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows because it pauses this rule and significance over what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend it freely.
And the craftsmen know how to compare a little about many things; and what is present about what is absent; and they find new operation and novel instrument, which descends from the strange causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other part.
And that which is forgotten by the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the judgment of the hour in which it falls, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and thus the attraction of it and its exit will be alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and does not obey your judgment, then leave it for some days and try to attract it with motion on any day, and already it will be forgotten.
And if you do not obey your judgment, then it is necessary to perforate the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire affected part so that the subtle travel through the location is amplified by the arrow.
Perhaps the arrow is embedded in the location of the body, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you inquire about that in tenths, and if you feel that, then you use those convenient instruments for extracting it.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you feel around the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have the instruments which are necessary, then you deliver the flesh in which it is stuck from entire affected part to the engine that you may do; and ingeniously work on that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the instruments and in twisting them until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is, then you use a twisting motion with your hand and forceps on all parts until it obeys; and subtly use a subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to extract it.
And if you cannot operate on it at that time, then you leave it for several days until the parts that are in its circuit can be restored, and you iterate that because then it is alleviated. Perhaps if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in the previous chapter.
And beware of your virtue of incision on the vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engines in all manner possible for the evacuation of the arrow; and make it facilitated and tranquil and tardy and firm thus as you have recommended.
And thus you do the contrary to the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you will get the removal of the arrow from him, because it is more just. Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten for the contrary of the other part, or that have proceeded to some part outside, or have made the extraction of the arrow by sentiment of the part because of the codena propdana and sometimes that is eminent; then you section about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and thus you use that, for it is made easier to judge.
Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrariness until the arrow is embedded in the bone, and amplify it to itself, and thus extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and thus iterate that until you see it.
And if the residue of the arrow is in that, then you impel it with the instrument.
Perhaps if the residue has fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and into that, if it is hollow, instrument concave so that it enters the concavity of it in the coil of the arrow and thus impel it with the instrument.
Perhaps if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then it is necessary that you concave all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and thus cure it with what is convenient.
And if the arrow has fallen into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the rib, and it is close to where you touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and beware of incision on a vein or nerve, and extract it, and thus heal the wound if it is injured, and cure it until it is healthy.
The form of forceps which are suited to extracting arrows:
If the extremities of their body are like a bird's beak that is affected with cold humors when they take hold of the sagitta, so that it does not become loose.
And of those, they are affected by specific cold humors, great, few, and mingled, according to the quantity of the greatness of the sagitta and of the small weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of the constriction of it.
also with a ray, so that the instrument in it is alleviated in the concave sagitta and it is thrust forth into that.
From the flow of the veins.
The veins of flow, which customarily correspond to flowing in this way. of those that are in the head, 16. it is two pulsing veins that are near the aurellias, they say alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and it is two veins that are beneath the tongue. More, the veins that are flowed in the arms, thus. because of those, one is a cephalic, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's a bitter vein, and it's a mixed vein, composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and veins of the arm, and it's placed above the focus, and it's the one that appears above the foot by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein which is between the auricular digit and the smallest digit, and there are two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the dentate vein of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The juvenation of the veins that are near the aurellias is against ancient catarrhs and emigrations and sahafations and ulcerations of the bad head, antiquated ones.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you have recommended to me: it is that it should be shaved on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed in the occiput, where both veins are ample and good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a bandage that appears to show the two places near the aurellias in two places of premature bleeding on the head; and you will see it in the whole digit, and if you feel the pulse of those in the whole digit, here I will signal to you.
Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce it below the vein in the codeina until the flow of blood comes out at the orifice. And then you elevate your hand on the vein and codeina to the superior parts above and incidentally incise the vein in an incidental incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two digits adjusted or around that; and make a slight flow of blood as much as you want.
And then strengthen the pulse and let it be until it is healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More, of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the juvenation of the flow is against ancient emigrations and bad habits and constant obtalmia and body of acute overflowing fluids to the eyes.
And the quality of flowing those is according to what you have recommended to me: constrict the patient's neck with a motile movement until both veins appear at the sentiment for manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse of those in the whole digit; and then I will signal to you.
And then you elevate the codeina above the vein to the superior parts with the whole digit indicated, and introduce the flow incidentally below, and elevate the vein in its own; and incise it also as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient's hip, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a poultice on that joint and apply gentle pressure with your fingers to strongly constrict, and let it be so until it is healed.
And now the memory of the past has been recalled, and from those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the treatment.
And thus the evacuation of phlebotomy from the vein of the forehead is to be done through phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and purge rotten and festering ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you recommended to you; so it is that the patient tightly holds the sieve with an arm inside until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fleam, of which this is the form of it.
Stop the prominent point which is at the head of the fleam on that vein and percuss it with your finger or another instrument in the manner of it, and let the healthy blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
And some veins are opened in phlebotomy in this way, however it is not known that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity like the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a weak extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is fragile and strongly trembles in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
Moreover, the evacuation of the two veins that are like the lacrimal of two eyes for scabies of the eyes and to purge and cleanse them, and for the evils of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightly holds the arm with a bandage, and then phlebotomize it, and you stand steady over its head.
And it is done the phlebotomy according to the transverse along a little while phlebotomizing a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly trembles the extremity of it.
And then let the healthy blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place it on that joint, and hold it for a night, and then release it.
Moreover, the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and strong sweating, and for the evils of the face and to emigrate and purge those that accumulate in the face, and it is more beneficial when it is ancient.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient tightly holds the arm and you place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle fleam long and fix it in the proper place on the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sense here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
You know that you ultimately put your hand on the small phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for a night, because it is restored more lightly.
Moreover, the evacuation of phlebotomy of the two guides leads to constriction of the wings and beginning of leprosy and many evils and impetigo and bad corroding ulcers, just like herpes.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that the patient tightly holds something in the arm with a ligament; and there are artificial applications on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein at length with phlebotomy ample little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the ligament and hold the two veins with a moderate structure so that the patient is not suffocated, and let it be until morning because the plague is healed.
And the evacuation of phlebotomy of the Algerich veins, which brings about small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in its circle.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit down in front of you, and hold the arm with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of it and regard the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and that is why in the circle of those small black veins; and then you incise each one for an incidental incision.
Moreover, if you are in doubt about it, and you do not know which one is of those, then you should make an incision on the larger of those, and of the most manifest pustule of those.
And make them similar to the two veins that are in the lips above.
The two veins that are in the laboring tongue release the juvenile matter through phlebotomy of the cephalic region to purify what is in the gullet, at the malady of the uvula, and at the maladies of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy there is that it follows the malady between your muscles below the sun, and lifts the tongue of him, and regards beneath the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not ultimately harm your hand in phlebotomizing them, because beneath them are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the belly are those which customarily correspond to all the homes, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two manners, either by puncturing with a mirtilated or olive-tipped subtlety declining; or by sectioning with a cutellar phlebotomy, and applying it skillfully, and this is their form.
Thus the side of the instrument is like that, and converges to open the concave full veins appearing grossly, and to those that contain thick gross turbid matter.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser latitude and of a more subtle extremity, and converges to phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain thin subtle citrus-like (substances).
More youthfulness from the phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the sap of the maladies that are beneath the gullet and the colon, and from that which dries the chest and the belly.
And it converges to the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that one, that he beware of that and be above-temperament in that, because beneath it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of sap, so that he knows that he does not phlebotomize with a pungent phlebotomy, unless he is sectioning with skillfulness.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is known that you leave that one and move to another, or that you seek some other route; or that you phlebotomize at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and thus you do phlebotomy with skillfulness as we have said.
More if you want the phlebotomy of the metacarpus, then it is known that beneath the structure of the arm you touch the place inside which you know the place of the pulses, and you place your finger on him as you hold the arm; and you place the ligature on the arm and do phlebotomy with a concave section skillfully as we have said; and beware that you make a percussion for an exact space of the place of the artery.
And when you do so, as you stretch the ligament, it inflates at the place where you have held with your finger, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if the sap flows in phlebotomy as from an infant's auricle, and the sap is subtle red, then you know that it is of the sap of the artery; and then you touch and pause the tourniquet said over that for a long space; and then you stop the tourniquet, and if the sap is absorbed, because many evacuated matters are absorbed, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
And beware of the malady of the moisture of him, and be above-temperament of him and do not touch that for several days until he is healthy.
More if the sap is not absorbed, and it seems that you are not present with medicine at this time, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of him is constricted, and the sap is absorbed; or take a scorsa of fistic, and finish that, and take one maytat and stretch it over the place of the vein with descending structure and with pulvils until another day.
And then if the sap is absorbed, it is good; and if not, then cure that with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the pulverized abscesses absorbing flux of sap.
And the absorption of his sap is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
More of the dark vein phlebotomy is youthfulness that extracts the sap from the upper part of the head and to the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And if the patient has a numbness in that which is above the thigh, because it is a nerve; and then adjust at the puncture of the thigh and remove the nerve, it will cause stupor, and it is difficult to heal, and it will not be fully healed. And this nerve is moved away from the sentiment; and if it is hidden among some homes and is subtle and does not show, then you should pause the thigh in which you make numbness of uselessness, and avoid the nerve at your fortress.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein in its length.
The treatment of the thigh's vein of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the bad humors of the wheels.
And it is proper in this case, if you want the thigh to purge through the olive or myrtle thigh; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it does not involve the artery nor nerves.
You should strongly expect it to be an abscess in some homes, when it is not thigh-bound by the first percussion, you should not touch that abscess again.
The first of it is that you should know that the thigh is not administered unless in conservation of health and for hope of its recovery and caution against the advent of bad humors, and that it be made on one of the veins that are in the cord, so it is: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it be made at the beginning of spring, above lunch in spring and autumn, and in winter near nourishment, when apparent signs of replenishment appear.
And it should be made on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed since the morning sun.
The thigh treatment that is administered, always when it brings convenience and necessity to it, or of night or of day, at any hour and in any season.
And it is necessary that the child not be thigh-treated until they have 14 years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be thigh-treated except for four months within seven, and the old people should not be thigh-treated whose age has passed 60 years.
And how some people want to be thigh-treated for some mania, it is necessary to cleanse the intestines inside the thigh treatment with a gentle clusters, if in those there is a retained residue, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous humors in the thigh treatment of the intestines, which are purified, and do not disturb the principal members.
And they should not be thigh-treated, the patients with nausea and sacral cramps, nor evacuating bad humors nor of ebriety until that which is removed from them, nor bad humor of hydropic, and it is better that the thigh treatment be tempered according to colic passion and according to vomiting, and according to belly pain, and according to multiplication of coughing and of effort and of exercise of lunch or of vigils and of all cause that dissolves virtue, whether it be a corporal28 or animal.
And it is better to consider in subtle administration of humors within that if the blood is gross, with viands and beverages, and with medicines if that is possible for them.
And it is better to enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be excited by some exercise so that the blood may be subtle.
And pause the thigh treatment of it on the foot of the day, so it is around the hour of three, thus as we have said.
And I perform for you that the foot of that one should be guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, thus as is anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, thus as is effort and superfluous pain and coughing and similar to them.
And at its session, it should be present with the causes in the use of that which corrects the custom of the homes with aromaticity and odorament and with balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the thigh-treater on a cushion that is placed above the cushion of that one who should be thigh-treated.
And it is better to extract the juice of the arm, and rub that with its hand the thigh-treater two or three times; and it is better to strengthen the ligament in correction and involve those two times.
And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body's blood circulation.
And you should structure it so that whoever must be free from swelling of their hands in the meantime between their entrance, so that the veins are not inflated and are declared by sensation.
And you should prepare the fleubotomizer under a few drops of oil antic ordinarily; and pause the sieve of indication on the left hand over that vein, where you want to perform the fleubotomy, so that the vein is slightly opened, and the percussion is seated four fingers away from the veins, which are like a cord fleeing with the fleubotomy, and those are full of windiness when pauses the fleubotomy over that, it is contracted away from the fleubotomy, and the fleubotomizer is discovered; and the fleubotomy does not touch the vein, and if it touches, that is strengthened.
And so, for this reason, you should keep the fleubotomizer steady and solicit it in all these causes.
And then pause the fleubotomy, maybe if the vein is opened in a wrong way, that's bad; and if not, you iterate to another opening below that place a little, or above where it is fastened, if the place is not apostematized.
And if the place is apostematized, or the patient's condition worsens, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament, because the strong apostema attracts caution, nor does it enter in vain.
And then iterate the fleubotomy if it loves.
And if the perception is petite and you correct subtly, and fear that it does not have the quantity that you want, then you iterate the fleubotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do so with fastening beforehand, because the place is apostematized in many homes away from little perception.
Maybe sometimes that has already apostematized, then do not iterate over it, because it does not excuse you from any cause; and pause on that certain part of the wound of oil, because it alleviates the body's sanity. And it is better in this place where oil is, and that the other oils.
And similarly administer the wound of oil in all fleubotomy where it fleubotomizes the veins away from the prohibition of body sanity, and make a tyrical alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those above the place, because the sanity is subtly irritated and revolves when it is gross.
And if in the place of the fleubotomy a great apostema is generated, because many veins are injured, and majorment to that which has not been staunched since that vein, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you touch, and pause on the spot soaked in water and salt, a little scaled, and strain for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And you should prepare that accordingly to structure the sentiment of the body's sanity of that vein in complement with it or another vein.
And if you remain in the place for some days with certain blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you want, pause on that certain cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or certain cause of juice of mentastre or of calament or similar to it.
And many veins are injured so that apostemas and eminences come from the fleubotomy of the basilica.
And then pause your hand over that, and if then you find softness from your compression on that, then that eminence is evil and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you pause on that certain cause of that which we have said, because the strong flow of the artery's sanity.
And do implanting in that which is stipulated, so that the place is hardened, and then heal that hand with another healing until it is sanctified.
And you should extract from the body a total man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the venting color appearing over the body as it appears.
Because if the body is black, then you leave it to be purified until it is red; and similarly if you see it gross, then you leave it to be purified until it is subtle; and similarly if it is agitated, until the acuity of it is stopped.
And you should add to that which is full and strong and has need of extraction of body in a wrong way, that the fleubotomy of the vein be amplified and the fleubotomy instrument be broad.
And in that which is frail, do the contrary of that, and you should extract that in many ways, and that the tract be strengthened.
And the best that is administered in fleubotomy of vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this manner of fleubotomy is safe from flow of body and from injury of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than fleubotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And it is accustomed to overcome syncopes from the fleubotomy, and you should cure that beforehand with the fleubotomy in a small pause infused with milk of milgranas or simple scaled oximel; and extract the fluid from the body in three ways or four.
And if it is a case of complete putrefaction, then take beforehand the flowers of botany to infuse in a mixture of myrrh or in a mixture of honey aromatized with special spices, such as pepper, ginger, and cinnamon, or in a mixture aromatized and strongly smelling.
And if it is a case of sudden collapse, and it is the cause of much bleeding, then it is necessary to take in drinking water of flesh and strongly smelling myrrh; and use aromatic quality in some ale, and anoint the dry chest with that.
And use the other causes that we have stated in the division on the chapter of sudden collapse for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate the dry arm and dissolve the dry blood for the second time, it is necessary for the one from which the botany is for much evacuation, and the strength of it is fresh, that evacuates the small blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the strength in the continuing days.
But whoever wants to evacuate the dry arm, and throw out the dry blood for the second time, and the dry body is strong, then make it so around 8 hours or 9 of the first botany.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of the dry body to the contrary of the part from which it declines, then it is necessary to evacuate on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scavenged and it is acute and makes fever rise, then it is necessary to throw out the blood at once and a great quantity should be thrown out and the perception should be amplified so that it induces sudden collapse; for you have conserved all the conditions of botany; and place your hand over the pulse of the patient's body, so that death does not occur in place of sudden collapse, because many times it happens when the botanist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for the second time, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is very difficult to make the blood flow, that you press underneath with vehemence and the vein is extended violently, because this is too bad.
Having the ladder within so that it is botanized secondly; or remain with the acute part of the botany which coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on top of Tyrian agar, or of sagzena, and compress it with a gentle pressure so that the blood is forced out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood for the second time, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed from that place or in another arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is botanized in place of the fuse or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or shrunk, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the botany of it is that the patient inserts his hand in hot water until the focal point becomes red and the vein appears manifestly.
And then it is strengthened over that spot with a mild stricture; and then botanized according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor according to the longitude.
And it is a broad perception and it is your botany that you botanize over the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate with your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you were in the summer days, then you are excused from iterating with your hand in hot water, and the month is placed with the body of the blood in hot water in winter time.
And the botany of this vein is more salvaged than all the other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the botany of the little finger on the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the botany of it is that you strengthen your hand in a bandage or with your own hand, because you have placed it in hot water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the senses; and then botanize it transversely; and if you inject it all at once, you will not feel anything in return.
And be careful that you do not botanize your hand with the botany, because it has the nerves of the fingers deprived of flesh.
And then iterate with your hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate with hot water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And as the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly it is necessary that you do it in a straight row.
The greatest benefit of phlebotomy on that hand is that it is convenient for the evils of the waist.
And similarly in phlebotomy of the other hand, as you have done on this one.
And the benefit of the saphena vein phlebotomy is for the evils that are in the lower part of the body, as well as for the evils of the matrix, and for retention of menses, and for the evils of the knees and ulcers of thighs and legs, and for their similar evils.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes a friction upon that spot until the veins appear; and he puts it above the joint of the foot in a circular motion; and the place of the vein is apparent where the digit touches, and from there it ramifies into the surface of the foot, which makes the muscles relax.
And then phlebotomize the pus abundantly that runs down the leg to the ankle and to the gathering of it, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you phlebotomize on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy in which you phlebotomize for the crossing, lest you want to incise them.
And be careful with your phlebotomy tools.
But if it is prohibited to bleed the blood; then you put his foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first vein, then try again with a small instrument, because the place is healthy; and do not fear his evil, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do with the saphena vein of the other foot in the same way.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is also as we have said, down to the ankle below the hollow of the wooded partition.
And the benefit of phlebotomy on it is for pain of the ankle when it is due to bad blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that the patient enters into a bath, and tightens and strengthens the bandage of his ankle from the thigh to the foot below, for four fingers in a long subtle band, so that nothing appears except through that.
And then when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each engineer that is possible for you and according to the crossing, and it is better; or incise that for incision or section that for section, because the place of it is healthy.
And it is in many homes much loved; and if you examine that, and nothing appears to the entire sentiment, then phlebotomize some vein of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot in the auricular and anular digits.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow out in the quantity that you want.
And then release the structure and pause above the place of the phlebotomy, and strengthen the place, because the easing is healthy.
About ventilation and about the qualities of using those.
Ventilations are made with horns, or with iron, or with glass.
And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, because one is with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are 13 places in the body, among which one is where pauses are made in the ankle; and the middle place of the neck, in two parts of the collarbone together; and ventilations of the chin below the mandible, almost below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is above the end of the hip; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not capture the virtue through them, just as it is captured through phlebotomy; nor do they believe that ventilation can be done with fire or without fire in any evil made for replenishment until the entire body is evacuated.
But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for evil or for continuation, administer that at every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time it is.
And then when it happens for some of those reasons, and properly if it is in the third or middle finger of the hand, then we command that it should be done more than two or three hours a day.
The youthful strength of the neck is that when it confers gravity to the head and it seems that it has founded the wheels; but rather it is proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this strength is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
And it is not lawful to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great annoyance.
And for that reason one should not use those old things, and in the heads of which there are badly affected fringes.
But rather to the one that is continuously on it is done forgetfulness; and for that reason you command the strength-giver to place his hand a little away from the window at the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But strength-giving of alkahel is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for that reason it confers asthma, and constriction of the wings and scission of the instrument of the wings, and to those, and replenishment.
And it is necessary that the strength-giving of alkahel be tempered a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
And the strength-giving of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and emigration, and foreclosure, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilisk.
And it is necessary that you command the strength-giver not to press his hand on the scarification so that he does not cut the artery and accelerate flows of blood.
And strength-giving below the mind confers a bitter taste in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to those bad things that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the astringent that is in the two lips.
But the strength-giving that is done on the two spatulas confers a capturing, which is done for replenishment of warmth.
And the strength-giving of the two divided parts of the focal points confers youthfulness of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those veins more than the thin ones that are in the flesh, and those thin veins of the other veins become thicker until they bring attraction to the three veins.
And command the strength-giver that he should not proceed with scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are his nerves and arteries.
And it is a strength-giving with which one is strengthened over the hips and confers emorrhoideas of the backside and ulcers below.
And it is necessary that you command the strength-giver to be great strength-giving, and that it be of iron, because the place indicates a strong dryness; and strongly his wounds are subtle strength-givings and are scarified in scarification.
But strength-givings of the minor veins manifest through diminution, because they attract the blood from the whole body, and confers ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confers cold and faintness; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two saphenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
However, I will not weaken the whole body and make it fall into syncopy in many places.
And of the strength-givings of alahorcoben, the youthfulness is proportionate to the youthfulness of the strength-givings of two veins.
And the quality of the position of the strength-givings is that it pauses the strength-giving at the beginning of the evacuation and sucks for tempered suction, and does not prolong the position of the strength-givings, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains those quietly, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingraft. And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already enraged and inflated and that appears the rigor of the blood.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, it is necessary that you scarify him once and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the strength-giver to amplify the scarification and make a little impression, and temper the suction with facilitated ease.
And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify two times, because in the first time it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and its aquosity. But in the second, there is scrutiny acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very filthy, then make a scarification on the third vertebra to constrict the latter.
Therefore, when we want to extract a little blood, either from a small vein or a small one, it is enough for us to make a scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is abundant, then we cover it so that we can scarify in advance.
And the term of scarification is where the depth of the incision is only as much as the thickness of the skin.
And if the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the veins are very constricted, it is understood that the places of the ventoses are not tender, but rather resolute; if it is in summer time, thus with oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of camomile; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem similar.
And if the excess is great, cold, then the oil should be amaranthine, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloes, or oil of aneth, and to those that seem similar.
Moreover if the ventoser is of ample pores to tender flesh, then it is prohibited to use oil, and it is necessary that the places of ventoses be washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of camomile, or water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
And that in which the blood is of much humidity, wash its ventoses with warm wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And of that in which the excesses are great, wash its ventoses with warm anticy, or water of sansuc, which is majorana, or of decoction of aneth, or of chamomile, and to those that seem similar.
And it is necessary that the ventosation be kept inside a warm bath; having taken care that it be administered close to the warmth of the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary that it sleep close to the ventosation.
What is it that needs to be governed so that the veinous blood is taken out by phlebotomy before ventosation.
It is necessary to consider the beginning: then if the ventoser or he who needs to be phlebotomized is choleric and vents on the blood agitated and inflamed, then it is necessary to take causes of cooling, thus with milgranas acetosas, and endivia in warm wine and laytuguas, and scamabin, and julep, and similar to those.
And pause their wanderings thus with poultices, and flesh of auzels' serbigs, and wanderings conditioned with grapes, and to those that seem similar.
And of that in which the complexion is cold, it is necessary to take in drink essaroop alumina, or essaroop of scamabin seeds, and sumac, and wine with much odorant between viel and noel; and that it be commanded to use a little drink and mangar, and pause the wanderings of its poultices and canabir and pissers and small auzels and colombat.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventosation and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the wanderings.
And it is necessary that it be given in drink at certain hours to certain homes tyriaca alpharac, or medicaments of musc, so it is muscada, or alcilita inside the ventosation or inside phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtle; and it is not necessary that they take that scaldfath.
Moreover, the ventoses that have scarification are ventoses that have been paused on the joints, and on the melsa and podagra, and on the umbelic, in the places of the junolhs, and the pixida of the ancha, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those except attraction of blood from member, thus with paused ventosa on mamilha in bad humoral flux of blood from the blood of the nars; and we use that for dissolving cold ventosation inviscated from member, thus with paused on the belly and umbelic; because that rarefies the member and dispels it and resolves the pain since it resolves ventosation.
And already it is paused on the kidneys when they accumulate in their opilation or poyra, because for virtue of strong attraction the huobre opilation and eradicates the poyra from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is paused on the joints and the melsa, so that ventosation is enclosed in those.
And these ventoses are administered with juice only as much as necessary; and some vegetables are administered with focus.
And some vegetables are administered full of water, steeped in the bad humors of the melsa.
And that is why the wind should be filled and becomes greater, it is a warm water or water in which seven herbs are cooked to make it convenient.
Method of administering wind: the amplitude of the orifice is two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the instrument should be the width of a palm; and it should be in the fat of the patient, in the place where it is in the circuit, the width of it, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Make a mixture of rough cerate, thick margins, lion, engulfs and tiers so that the member does not deviate from its position on it.
And place the middle of the vertical line of rough iron or of iron on which a candle is placed in the fire.
And now this wind is much greater than the one we have recommended; and the little less of that according to the ailments and the state of the one who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the elderly are more extensive than those of the young and of thick bodies.
And the quality of placing this wind in the fire on the member is that it extends the flame in the fire decently from a small candle of wax, and place it above the middle of the vertical line, in the middle place of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the part below, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
And then it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the tube that we have said, until when we hold the cupping glasses and do not induce that the finger opens and the vapor rises over that tube, then the wind will be almost dissolved.
And adjust the flame according to its manner, and remove it if it is induced by that.
There is a type of cupping glass that is administered in the treatment of flatulence, with water, in which there is no vertical line nor tube, and it is not administered except that it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
And this is its form: And this cupping glass, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 148.
Blood-letting is not administered on many members except on the members where it is not possible to place cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the vein and gum, and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similarly.
And the quality of using those that you have found blood-letting cups that are on the two watery vessels of purging worlds.
And then they should be left in the water vessel day and night until they are famished, and that no remaining cause is in the belly of those; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient should be cooled until it is red-hot; and then they should be placed on it.
And when they are filled and closed.
And if it is possible to suck from the place with cupping glasses, it is more direct in juvament (probably means "in treatment").
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then apply much water; and it should be cooled and expressed.
And if the body of the patient is prolonged with the flowing of blood-letting cups, and it is that which remains, then you sink a piece of cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the flow is stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder over it with tristulated vitriol, or gall and similar to them of stiptic causes, until the blood is abscessed; or place on the place the widths of excavated favas, and leave them until the favas adhere to the place, and the blood is abscessed.
And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood-letting cups, when it is possible to move them.
And if the blood-letting cups are prohibited from suspension, then cool the place with recent blood or fix a needle in the places until blood comes out; and then they should be placed, because those who feel some blood almost immediately adhere.
And when you want to calm them down, powder over them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or ash, and it will soon be so.
Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, know that I have thrown away from this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgar ones who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and I have not omitted anything from all time being complete; and I have not inhabited anything that comes after, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, until extracting the science from them.
And I properly direct my experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which I have passed my experience; because I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from occupation of elongation; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I showed it at the end of declaration; and I formed it into many forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, thus as I did in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary premise is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse ones, if singular. Therefore, I will outline in the proem of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those who at the beginning are forced to stop the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn from this noble art besides you.
And therefore I say that when accidents occur due to fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling, then it is certain that you should start with flebotomy or alleviating that, or at any rate, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or it is in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And I am content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and crabs; and I prohibit fatty meats and filling up on food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regiment, in which they customarily dwell.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is certain that the patient should be fed with nutritious food of much and gross nutriment, as if they were viscous, thus as their food is made from wheat flour, and rice, and cabbage, and peas, and cow's stomach, and mutton, and fresh fish, and gross and similar foods to those, and in this regiment it is done a coagulation of fracture by gentle and soft means.
And you know that the broken bones, when they are in the old men who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit ones, it is not possible that they can be continued and consolidated according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
The Emperor of Nature adjusts and anoints over the broken bone of all parties any cause similar to glue, in which it is grossly strengthened that adheres and strengthens it until it becomes conglutinated and united, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits them from their works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the food of the patient, foods in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, thus as we have said.
And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
And I have come to remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in the seven distinct chapters, each one different from the others.
A variety of fracture in itself, in its own measure. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their own measures; for there is a curved fracture which occurs on the stars; and some veiled ones are made into a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astella and preceding and non-preceding, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a fracture of small fissure.
And to every species there is a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come to remembrance of it distinctly in the seven places.
A sign or indication of fracture of the bone. And for that, a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and of its prominence and appearance to the sense, and thus of it when it comprehends with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the location, nor does it feel deviated from its proper touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is twisting or small fissure, but I do not think that you can manipulate it with your hand and compress everything; however, pause over it from the medicines of which you have remembrance at that moment, which convenes to the location; and therefore, I am strict for subtle structure.
You know that the place where it is arched and does not separate into two or another water that does not accumulate in the patient's seat, as it is remembered by the entire comparison of their body, then it is necessary to begin from your own hour for the rectification of the habit that has been accused of apostema.
And if it has been accused of apostema, then let it be for some days until the apostema ceases; and then heal it according to whatever manner you can lift and engender.
You know that restoration of it and agglutination of it is less frequent than the bones in which it accumulates, thus it causes satagy.
And then strengthen it according to what will bring back its memory.
But if the bones are thus satagiated, then it is necessary to extend this broken member in two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or take your hand if the member is small; or take two cords or take one cord and the hand.
And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member are then perfected so as to return those additions in a way that you can engender and according to whatever manner you can place them in their places.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not fall upon the patient during your operation, nor cause a lesion; and perform according to your own power that you apply one bone to another in their companion, according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that hour you touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is some diverse cause, rectify it and heal it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, thus as many foolish doctors who, in their ignorance, cause apostema to accumulate through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, just as we have seen it happen through the operation of their foolish ignorance.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which you have recommended; for you know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the vein, and similar to those, then it is necessary that the wrapping be with a very subtle cloth.
But those that are large, such as the hip or the leg, it is necessary that in those there be a strong and hard wrapping, because the strong connection connects the big member and strengthens it throughout its entire part in a whole structure, so that in it no macula enters.
And then begin, and then your evacuation of equality, pause the convenient ligament according to that, on the place of that fracture in three wrappings or four according to whether the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.
And then see if it goes to the part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen more that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself in the wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure little by little, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken place in wrapping, and then see if the wrappings are on the part above the fracture; and let your operation be in the structure of the wrapping and in softening of that according to what we have said in the primary wrapping from above.
And then pause between the turns of the wrapping or cloth on which the tortuosity of the fracture is whole, if it has tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it for any cause.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then wholely heal upon these wrappings decently made so far, if in the place there is no inflammation or apostema caut, and then pause on that which sits the apostema and removes the inflammation; and let it be for some days; and then you strengthen on the wholeness.
And let the wholeness of the marrow of the cane of a strong race be formed saviently; or let it be of fir of pine; or of ramps of palm; and let the width of each wholeness be according to this form and this figure:
However, it is necessary that the wholeness which is paused on that fracture be thicker and longer a little than the other wholenesses, and the length of the stela according to what is written on the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen on the wholenesses with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then liaise from above decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when more is alonguated from the fracture, it mends the structure.
It is known that the veins are thick and subtle, and they are of the same humidity; and if the veins are thick, thus you have seen through the operation of certain foolish doctors who tighten the cords of the twisted vein, and it is a great error, when one tightens the structure away from equality.
The subtle veins are not so convenient, because you will not constrict them by structure for those who want, and it is known that between this and that there is less than a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to place the structure in their proper places, then pause and let those of stopped lion or calm carmina enter so that it does not cause them harm.
Some wounded fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find a reminiscence in that chapter according to singularity.
And it is known that all broken members are not straight on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not know how to pause over the stars until five or seven days, according to your secure advancement of apostemic caution.
And this is the method of the surgeons among whom the Ancients restored, who were expert in setting bones back in place for fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of surgical setting as an abrupt restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major wounds to the veins and to the skin, because it is about that on which there is no warmth nor cold: and it is that you take powdered millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
And you will find that thus it is, unless you remove the crust from the white of the egg, and pause the complexity of it without space or subtlety; and then use it thus.
Another manner of implanting is to restore fracture and dislocation and torsion: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from millet salvage, one dram; of mirra and aloen one dram; of alochil two drams; all are trituated and cribellated and mixed with agua alichil or album of huou if the completeness of the patient is scalded; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones conveniently, and confers many homes.
Another manner of implanting which confers on fracture and torsion: recipe migrach and a half dram of white alta, one dram; of mirra and aloen one and a half drams; of acacia two drams; of Armenian boil three drams.
All things are ground in a mortar with a strong contradiction, and all things are stirred, and all things are comforted in the water or in egg whites and it is administered.
Method of surgical setting for joints and separated bones in their proper places, and thus accidental pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take the lame bandage and submerge it in warm oil and cook it and place it over the area.
More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of cautious apostemic and expelling pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fragrant flowers of fig tree sort and flowers of salvaging poppy; mix all together and make a plaster of their kind.
Method of plaster abbreviated administered for restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining apostemic: recipe roots of alta, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of peas, of all in a partition. all things are ground and all things are cooked in wine, if the member is not scalded.
More if it is scalded, then confers that in water of colandine humid or in water and uses it.
Another method of plastering strongly in resolution that this first, when it causes apostemic duration for restoration of the member: recipe of roots of alta and seeds of lilac, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all in a partition; all things are ground and all things are cooked in water of sage or in warm water or in wine, all according to the quality of the member and the repose of the color of it.
More Hippocrates did not disagree in the free judgment that it is placed over the broken member for restoration of it, unless it is a cerotic making of wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it is more subtle between thickness and subtlety.
Most of Galen's teachings suggest that one should focus on restoring the affected limb and addressing the causes which lead to excessive dryness, thus diminishing heat, while observing and considering similar cases that we have previously recommended.
Many types of plaster that provide comfort and relief from pain: take honey, wax, soft skin of a young animal or the fat of a goose, and other ingredients, including salt, divided into equal parts; then mix and knead, and make a cohesive plaster.
The amount depends on how much one thinks will remain in the bandage and then disperse, considering that if there is no pain or inflammation and the bone is not broken, it will not be moved from its place, so you should not remove the dressing for many days. And if you encounter a violent pain or inflammation or swelling at the location, then touch it gently or remove it at that hour, and apply a new plaster.
And take a cloth and a humid marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the location until the inflammation and pain are calmed; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place a lukewarm lana beneath, submerged in a mixture of oil and rose oil, and apply it to the affected area for nine days, until you are certain that the apostema is cured, and the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain is relieved.
And then apply a subtle structure and a small plaster, not too tight, for your primary constriction, and subtly work it in until it is healthy.
And if the apostema and redness and pain and swelling and all the accidents are completely relieved, and you have removed the plaster and structure, then you will proceed in the same way as you did from the beginning of the treatment.
And if you do not encounter any of the causes mentioned earlier in the affected limb, then do not remove it except after three days or four or five; and some remedies that are left on for 20 days according to what appears appropriate for the dislocation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust the structure more than in your primary constriction, and assist in the nourishment of the patient's life force, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Most of the time, if you find that the fracture is dry and withered more than it should be, then you will know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and so embed it in warm water for a full day; and let it be thus for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the limb's nourishment, and it will heal quickly.
Most of the time, those who are restoreers of the fracture of a limb do another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to what is suitable, and it is restored according to its twistedness, which is an error according to their operation, and there is great fear, and if you were to agrandize the Antics in their free books and would have worked on that.
And I have not seen anything like it in their work, because it is more reasonable that they did not do it.
Chapter according to: On Fractures that occur in the Head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of a bone, and the percussion breaks all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, just as it happens in the chest, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the bone splits into some part, and it splits the flesh around it but does not pass through to the back of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and the cause of it is percussion with a heavy object or fall upon stone, and its symptoms are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating that approaches near to the pancreas which is behind the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And this fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like fibers, and for this reason it is named this species of fracture "capillary".
And it is a fracture that is made by fall or by percussion of stone and its symptoms, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it happens to the fragile edges when they receive their percussion and are divided into the entered parts.
And mostly it is made in the bodies of human bones, just as it happens to the heads of elephants.
And thus all these species of fractures are gathered, they are weights just as stars are separated. And you will find a remedy for all that in its place.
I will examine all these species of fracture for detection above them and for inquiry into their tender and corrupt flesh that is above them.
The species of hair is recognized by this that is discovered above the bone, and it is cleared away, and limited to their tender part, because the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fracture consider at the commencement the accidents of the patient, and then if you observe through the accidents that signify manifest signs above pain, such as vomiting from bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and efflux of the veins and rigor of those, and resemblance to their accidents in the major dispositions, they do not depart from health.
And if you observe non-concurrent accidents you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is because it has come to you at the beginning with plague as it begins and it is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the osteology of the bone within the 13th day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is above the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and that the accidents which we have recounted happen.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is among divided and atrophied parts, then it is necessary that you sew the divided part with stitching, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner possible to yourself according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you to make the detection of the bone, whether it be with blood or apostemic caution, then you oppose yourself to that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of drapped infusions in wine and rose oil, and make repose the plague until it be sedated by the apostema, and you are secure from fluxes of blood; and then begin with the circumcision of the bone and in its ablation.
And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you sew the bone with sutures of strong thread, and this is its form: Then administer another suture like this, a little wider than that; and this is its form.
And then administer more sutures wider than the preceding one.
And it is necessary that you have a number of diverse sutures, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and some are of iron or felt.
And use them to facilitate percussion above the sutures so that they do not touch the head and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of it within that you administer the sutures with the taravelles, which are called non-deep taravelles.
And they are not named thus except because those do not touch the term of the bone to that which is above it, so that the taravel is rounded at the extremity or margin above that which is below the head of the agut, resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passes the spiciness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these taravelles in great number of which some convene to the spiciness of each bone, until it be present to you in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is aguted, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of spiciness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of taravels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the taravel above the bone and revolves it with the ties of ditto until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then permute the taravel to another place, and pause what is between all truce the quantity of the grossness of the radius or environs what is.
And then sew with sutures what is between each truce of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can put above it in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or have your hand, or have some other cause for some instruments which will be prepared to that, as we have demonstrated, with forceps and subtle tongs.
And it is necessary that you keep with all caution so that the suture does not touch any cause of the cipher.
And then, since you have circuited the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cipher if it is continued with it, and you have extracted that, it is necessary to reason and equalize it in the asperity of it with what is in the bone with another instrument similar to a suture, more imperiously than those other sutures.
If you find some part of the small bones broken and dislocated, then take it in your hands to facilitate its reduction; and afterwards cure the wound with liniments and anointing the ones that have been affected.
And another manner of operation is to extract, far from pain, which Galen and the wise men have written about in great detail; and this is their sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the breakage of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that breakage and have placed beneath it the extremity of this inspector, slow and gentle, which is the form.
It is that the blunt breakage is lazy and does not hide any cause, and the acute breakage is of it in two layers ahead in length, sometimes; that the blunt breakage should be adjusted to the ciphac on the face of the acute incident bone.
And then percuss on the inspector of a breakage with a small hammer until you have discovered the entire bone to facilitate it, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not fall into the accident that you fear in no manner; and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their lore; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
When you find some annexed cause attached to the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, you will discover that one with the extremity of the inspector, and you will deliver it with ease, because it is delivered from its nocuments and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is abscessed or removed from the bone is its face, and you find it in its roughness and subtle dislocations, then it is necessary to raise that roughness and radiate those dislocations with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them at all convenient places and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on the broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary to administer in your razor at the time when you raise the bone at the beginning of the most distant from those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to go according to continuity until you reach administering the most tender and most subtle of all.
More often in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you perceive for the rectification of it.
And it is a cause that has not been diminished regarding all those who have studied in this art. And I will stop writing about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is retracted when you radiate the bone, then it is necessary to take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary drap, making it as gentle as possible so that you do not injure the ciphac; and then administer over that liament later, and do not stretch it unless for the quantity that has the wound alone.
And leave that in this care for a day or two until you are secure from apostema caution; and then dissolve it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous dryness, such as liniment of wine and flour of errors, and powder of senses and aristology, and similar to these.
And it is that you make from these powdered medicines that are powdered over the wound, such as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property of which it is that absorbs and does not bite.
And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of deceit nor another; nor do not let virulence accumulate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls into the malaute with that malignant malice.
And it falls into the ciphac of the head, as it is mondified by the bone and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it becomes blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then if it falls into the malaute with the accidents that have been said, knowing that it is pernicious and all has been lost.
And if it does not blacken except from the medicine that is placed beneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackening, then it is necessary to take honey from one part and rose oil parts three. and mix those liniments in a drap, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Know that it is not fractured from the nose but two parties together above, or one of those some veins, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not fractured and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
When one of the two parts of the fractured bone is broken off, then it is necessary that you introduce the small digit into the nasal passage, and that you straighten out that fracture according to the indication of the same digit, and with the same digit beforehand, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And make it easy for you to facilitate, and beware that you do not fall for that operation on the patient's abdomen.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the digit does not reach it, then it is necessary that it be adjusted with the extremity of a rod on which there is a small gadget.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the semblance of that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach the vicinity or the point of rest of the apostemated abscess.
And introduce into the extremity of the nose a thread of cloth from them, if the fracture is in one part, or two small tubes, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the tube with a large quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And I have seen some of the ancient restorers who had tubes inserted in wood, and they were permuted all day, but it was not visible to me; however, it is necessary that the thread be inserted into a wooden box as if comforted with powders of millet; and then apply the tube until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And some vegetables are introduced into the nose, in place of a tube, pain of a certain water that is enveloped with cloth from the lion's thread; and it is that already you have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, make tubes.
And if another apostemated abscess occurs, apply the nose with wax or sew it up with thread and oil rosat, or with diachylum.
But if an abscess does not occur, then it is necessary that you apply beforehand a poultice made of sesame flour and powder of rose seeds in a wooden box; and then place it on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments or are comminuted, then it is necessary that you dissect around them, and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and then close the incision, and cure it in a way that encarnates and consolidates, and apply a plaster that is convenient for it.
And if a plague reaches the nose, then it is necessary that you cure it with tubes and administer lead pipes until it is completely healthy.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not plagued, consider then if the fracture is only so much alone, and it is not broken into two and curved towards the inner parts, then its cognition is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce the left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and press on that with the gloved hand of the fractured part to facilitate the forward parts, with your other hand on the forward part of the bone; and in this way you will decently equalize it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension of the two parts according to rectitude until it is possible to equalize it.
And if there is concussion of teeth to dislocation, then strengthen those with which you hope that they will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then place over the fractured jaw wax, and place over it a double-layered cloth, and place over it a large star-shaped decently made bandage, or a piece of sole leather along the length of the jaw; and then bind it underneath according to how you have prepared the ligature of it and which is convenient for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place the food of their meals in lion's bites.
And if you think that the figure has already altered in some manner, then you try it and dissolve it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of powder of millet, or of sesame flour, or of rose seeds, since you will have removed the wax from it, and place over the poultice a lion's paw.
And then add cum sta annex and adjust that poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, so leave it, which does not remove it until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many vegetables are strengthened by this fracture in three weeks.
And if another severe abscess appears, then administer what we have said about frequent movements in the patient's sitting position until they are healthy, and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is a painful wound, then consider whether it is a separated or displaced bone, then you will subtly understand that those displacements are what converge in the removal of those instruments.
And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you will amplify it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have restored those displacements, and they will not be removed again, then you will close the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and if not, pause over one of the emplaisters that converge to this and encarnate this, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the ankle when it is dislocated.
Frequent movements are necessary when the ankle is torn apart from the joint, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is torn apart, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not converge to displacements; and it is easier to restore it; or it is also that they converge in the displacements, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is also that the fracture is a painful wound.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a painful wound, is that you should have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and supports the torn ankle, and the other extends the vein to that joint.
And then adjust the fracture with the tendons in place until it takes its natural form according to its convexity, and it is not prominent or concave.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the patient's thigh a thin strip of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and elevate the ankle and shorten the strip with your hand until it adjusts the fracture according to its convexity.
And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the ankle to its former parts, because it has been pervaded by the preon, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and place a large cushion under one of their legs in greatness.
And the minister precedes the muscle of it to the parts below until the bone of the ankle is elevated as it is in its preon, and then you straighten the fracture and adjust it with the tendons in place.
But if you feel displacements of the ankle and its joints, then it is necessary to bend over that and extract those displacements to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision of it with one of the instruments which have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the ankle the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron, whose shape is this.
And it is similar to a scoop whose concavity is this; and its width is according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there are two extremities like this, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you have extracted the displacement of the bone is wide, and you are sure of a severe abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a severe abscess, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
And if a severe abscess converges, then you put a warm cloth in wine and oil, and place it on that.
And thus, that the board is not moved away from the broken bone; and for this reason it is necessary that you see the patient every day, because when the bandage is mollified or the board has been removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the ligature.
And then place the patient's sleep on their neck, and place underneath them the small cushion of theirs at night; so that it is elevated with the help of theirs from the side of that, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the muscle; or their arm is lifted to their neck.
And do not dislodge the limb unless it converges on the precise location of the abscess or aposteme within twelve days.
And then renovate the plaster if you have seen their face up to there, and adjust it in the structure and restore it so that it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is consolidated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some weakened areas are done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The splint is broken in the broad part of theirs and does not break unless at the edges.
And then when the site of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle site of theirs — and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, you should prepare theirs and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner of arranging it which is possible for you.
And then place on the powdery site of many album hounds and stop the lion; and then place a dust of double-layered cloth; and then place on the star-shaped tablet subtle according to the quantity of the entire splint or a little more.
Maybe if the star-shaped tablet is concave in some of the sites of the splint, then you will bend that concavity with stopping the lion, and then place the star-shaped tablet according to equality.
And then strengthen it below with a long humanation about decent construction and firmness of the star-shaped tablet until it is not removed from its site.
And consider the limb every day; and all weaknesses that it may be mollified, another weakness and strengthen it and equalize the star-shaped tablet if it is removed from its site.
And lift the patient over their own side there.
And the splint is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And then when this number is completed, then you will dissolve the limb, and you should know that it is assured that those are of the bones which began not to be tender nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the site of the bone's wound and put underneath the codena, then you will separate it from theirs, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula due to an abscess, cautiously so that it converges here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot, some weakened areas are broken in the middle site of theirs and that splint is torn apart; maybe the extremities of theirs are not ended, which are cicatrized and comminuted.
And of the accidents of theirs when it is broken in the middle of theirs, it declines to the internal divisions and converges to their great pain, and difficulty in walking, and faintness, and fortifying and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
And the restoration of theirs is that the patient should be resupinated over their own back, and placed between the shoulders of theirs a small cushion; and then prepare theirs muscles, and adjust the ribs of theirs with two or three rib-steadies, and subtly guide them in the operation of theirs and in the equalization according to every manner that is as possible and that converges to that, until the shape of the bone returns according to its cover.
And then place on theirs a plaster and stop it and place above the star-shaped tablet of subtle sauze or caligi and of its similar levitation, since you envelop that in cloth; and then subtly guide that on the broken bone so it is not weakened; and go with a ligature according to retonditat on the back some weakened areas, and strengthen that with decent structure; and then consider the ligature every hour, and when it is mollified, strengthen that.
And if it is necessary to provoke a dislocation of that because of corrosion or pruning, or pain, or abscess that converges in the site, then you will cut and dislodge that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what converges for that in every manner of cure of theirs; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is for that face; and adjust to their structure until it is sanitized.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross sites that follow the back; and of the extremities of theirs from the internal division do not converge to those contradictions unless for what is cartilaginous. And knowledge of theirs is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry of theirs with the fingers.
And the restoration should be thus that it equalizes the fracture in the fingers according to the possible manner, until it is equalized according to what is convex, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone in the star, if indicated by that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining into the inner divisions, then it produces vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that produces in one who has taken a fall, and for this reason the bone puts forth a swelling; and it produces difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the medicines are being prepared for that which is most ingenious.
And thus they say: it is necessary to pause the remedies of the patient that generate inflammation and windiness, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture may be pushed back into its proper place.
We have avoided that for fear of generating a severe abscess, if it does not succeed; and if it has succeeded, then it helps with that.
And they say that some of them should be paused under the window and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it seems like a rational consideration, but I, in my imperfection, fear that the window will attract the superfluities to the place due to debilitation.
And they say that some of them: it is necessary for the place to be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders are paused between the ribs until it is full, so that the binding may be equal when enveloping that according to retondition; and then the patient should be treated with a cure of poultices and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction in the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth a swelling with puncture ledent, I think about the patient, then it is necessary to bend over the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then pause on that instrument which conserves the ciphac, the remembrance of which precedes, and that incites the bone in facilitation, and extracts that.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a cositure, and heal that with plasters until it is sound.
And if it succeeds in generating an abscess, then you cook and put powders in rose oil and pause over the place, and that the patient should be treated with what is necessary for the abscess to resolve.
And it should be raised above the bed on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Some vertebrates have fractures in the bones of the neck, and they are similarly attributed to their own defect, and it seems similar to the vertebrae of the back. And with this, it succeeds in some and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, because many times the sick ones are more mollified and stupefied and deadened and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when they constrict those with the fingers or pierce those with a needle and do not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the midst of dispositions it is mortal.
And if you touch those and feel in those constrictions with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the patient will be cured with a cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider its feet.
Then if you see that it is mollified, it succeeds in those things that have happened in the worse, and then when you sit on the sick back, you feel windiness and egestation of their will, and some vertebrates are raised above the sick back and want to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not trouble yourself with its cure.
But if it does not succeed in any of those causes, the cause is worse and more severe abscesses.
And the cure of it is that you perform a sedation of the abscess with hot oil rose sol, or with mugs of warm water seated; pause on that for some vertebrates each day until the abscess is sedated.
And then pause one of the comforting plasters and exiting, and strengthen over that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected part until it is healed.
And if it succeeds in giving the defect of the satagious bone or any cause that has separated from it, then it is necessary to succeed over the codena and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then heal that with an encarnation of the enguentz, until it is healed.
But if the back of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coeta, then it is necessary that you insert the finger of your left hand into the cul, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for second equilibrium; and then pause over it with a plaster and astelha, if indicated by those, and then strengthen that.
And if you feel sharp stings in the leg, then put a poultice on that, and remove it, and take care of the wound with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrow passage.
The bones of the narrow passages are so broken, and if they break, then the fracture is not only communicated to the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline into the divided parts; and it causes bad pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it alone, then you straighten it according to how it appears to you for equal alignment until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or already declines into the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their back with their belly upwards until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have straightened it, place a plaster cast on it, and also place a splint of wood or of bamboo, and strengthen it with a strapping that does not threaten puncture of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
And straighten the concavity so that it fills in until it takes the structure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side so.
But if it causes an abscess, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place on it what sits upon it according to what precedes; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus with a covering.
And if they are in the sharp stings or are communicated, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjutator (adjutator likely means "adjacent" or "neighboring", but in this context it's hard to say exactly what it refers to, possibly a neighboring bone or joint).
Adjutator is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take a wooden board in place of a middle splint according to this form.
And tie it with two ligaments, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And place the patient on a seat; and then he puts his broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is attached.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor sees that the fracture is in its most sensitive places, until the fracture returns according to what is convenient.
And the other manner is that the patient is placed on their back with their neck suspended and their hand tied to the top of it with a ligament; and then he commands two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its most sensitive places; and the other holds the pus below it; and each of them extends to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen above the fracture with a ligament and on that with another ligament, and each of the two ministers extends to their respective parts.
And then if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is suitable that half of the ligament be placed on the tip and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is suitable that the ligament be placed on that location and on that elbow.
Straighten that which is facilitated and its troubles, and then when it will be straightened according to what is convenient and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if it does not cause an abscess.
But if it causes an abscess, then loosen the structure until the seventh day, and place on it a warm poultice wrapped in seven layers and rose oil until it relieves the abscess, and then you strengthen it.
And the manner of strengthening it is that you place a plaster cast on the fracture, and then you place an envelopment of new cloth over the plaster cast; and then you adjust the arm over that adjutator, and place its hand turned upwards over the shoulder muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the adjutator the arm so that the arm is in its usual place, if it does not prohibit anything from the broken bone.
And then it uses its usual function.
And it is that which places on the fracture that splint which is more steady and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and be the length of the splints according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from the entire part.
And then strengthen over the splints with the structure which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
It is that your tightening above the place of the fracture should be pushed straight. When the fracture has been lengthened, the tightening should be lesser.
And so if you arrange the position of the staples and the tightening as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its original situation, then do it.
And if you fear a severe abscess, then loosen the tightening and the staples within seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not accrue in the place of prominence or inflammation; or it is prohibited to bring food to the limb by disposition of superfluous tightening; and thus rectify all according to what we have said.
Moreover if you are convinced that no cause of this will accrue, then do not release the ligature except after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their bad dreams be on the stomach.
And pause on the auxiliary cushion full of woolen wraps, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not dislocated nor dissolved, or that the ligament is mollified, thus rectify all with your virtue.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have given you, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then cover that you increase the food of him.
Since the custom of the auxiliary and of his leg is that they are strengthened in 40 days; and then cover that they are released and administered bath and medicated among those who rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly treated, then do not release that ligament and staples for a day or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the elbow, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the small elbow, from the part below.
And sometimes the larger fork-bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are broken together.
And when the smaller fork-bone is broken below, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is easier.
And when the fork-bone of it is broken below the fracture, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small fork-bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension to facilitate its healing.
Moreover if the large fork-bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
And if both fork-bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the extraction much stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the figure of the hand in such a way that its restoration and extension are stretched out on a cushion, and the pulse of the hand is at the parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient sits on a wooden chair.
And let there be a cushion beneath him in the altitude or inclination of it, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part below to the hand or to the ligament, and another minister extends similarly from above.
And then the doctor reduces the bone into its place so that it returns to its best figure as much as possible.
And if the fracture of the bone is jagged, then you will perforate all the flesh in its place with your virtue.
And if it appears in the separated jaggedness that touches the code and is not according to your hope in its restoration, then you finish above it and leave it according to the manner which we have said above.
Moreover if the fracture is in a plague, you already did it to that singular chapter, and therefore take the care of that.
And if you fear abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you line up a drap with cerote fat of rose oil and white wax, and it is better between speculation and subtlety, and strengthen the drap over that with subtle tightening so that the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerote and put on an emplaster prepared from powder of soft mole in clear water, and then put on staples; and let the staple be the one that is placed over that fracture firmly and strongly.
And you know that the name of the staples of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one fork-bone or in two fork-bones together.
And then put your tightening over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it is more certain, extend the extrication to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, put the tightening a little more soft according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
The wraps that are enveloped around the fracture are many humid wraps, and they are not hard nor pressed, and it is necessary to strengthen them properly between subtle and large, thus we have recommended.
Examine the limb and the ligament closely for several days. And if you find some cause for which correction is necessary, thus you should straighten the limb, and then you should wrap the limb with warm water so that it ceases that distortion.
And leave the limb unbound until it rests, and then return to the usual structure.
And if the extraction is already softened and the bone is already reabsorbed and appears similar to those, then rectify all that with your virtue.
And consider more if the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then you should soften that a little and leave it for several days until it runs to that nutrient, and then strengthen it.
More if the patient does not find some cause among those that we have said, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around that.
And then the hand of the patient should be suspended for his virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or perhaps it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the finger of the hand and of the toes.
Know that the fingers of the hand and the toes often receive fractures, and they do not find their place unless with well-directed, gentle movements.
And when the hand receives a fracture or injury, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight line and align their fingers equally, and then pause his hand over that extension.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor reunites them so that they are well-conjoined in good conjunction.
And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, if you do not find an abscess to be cautious of; and then place a star underneath according to the quantity of the place, and you have already enveloped that in a wrap of linen.
More if the splint is in the divided parts of the belly of the palm, and then make it resemble a wrapping of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their wounded palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth wrap.
And the star of the body in the wrapping in which it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
More if the fracture is in the divided parts beforehand, then it is necessary to place stars underneath and another star of the part below on the palm, so that the hand is elevated and straightened; and then pause the structure, thus the hand is revolved to its proper alignment between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the toes, then it is a small toe, it should be reunited as necessary and then strengthened in the palm and if you want, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and not be bent.
More if the fracture is in other toes, thus as in that of the middle place, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be reunited and tied with the toe itself; or all the ties are according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star, thus as we have said in the toe.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess caution and opposition — in the true operation — in what is necessary when you find some cause among those, according to which the narration of it is iterated.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip often receives gentle fractures and is declared according to the sentiment as it is converted into the part above and the pus beneath.
And the restoration of it is done thus that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their belly and on their face.
And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
More if it is propped up at the root of the hip, then the ligament is propped up above to the part of the pelvis, so that the extension stays in itself, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is propped up above, then make the ligament propped up above, and let the extension be to the parts below.
And then the doctor reunites the bone with two splints more inside so that it reduces according to natural semblance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and structure, if you do not find an abscess in the limb. More often it happens in the abscess, then you will leave that for several days until the abscess is ripened, and then return to your cure.
The treatment of it is thus made: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and double or triple wrap it, and remove the superfluous; and then envelop the leg up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg proper to the dentate parts below, and bring together the extremities of the thread from the divided parts above, and then revolve over the leg and the thigh so that it does not overflow from the bandage.
And then pause over the thigh at the place of that fracture thus, and place one star-shaped thing over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the voids between the leg and the thigh with many drapings, so that the structure is coagulated.
And then begin a strong structure from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have more relaxed the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure will be lesser and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two extremities of the thread to the divided parts below until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped things on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its proper place.
And then leave the structure on that, so that it does not happen to the corroding member nor abscess nor inflammation and appears similar to those; and if any cause of those happens, then cut through the disunion of it, and rectify what has happened all along, according to what we have said many times.
More often it is in the bone where the weight of the bone lies, then cover that according to your possibility; and if not, place over it and remove that, and cure what was preceded by the reminiscence until it is healed.
And several times it is strengthened, this fracture of the thigh and other things that are adjusted to its star-shaped things, thus as we have said in the adjunct and in the arm.
More often in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not happen to the limping malady; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it limp for some time.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other disposings.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap dentation.
You know that fracture of the kneecap dentation is often, more happens to many repeated attritions.
More often it happens to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or a wound in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all has been stated with the opinion.
And the restoration of it is thus that it should be reunited with what is broken from its parts, and the pieces are gathered together until it is aggregated and conjoined according to what is possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
And then pause to mold it and place it over that round star, if you need it; and strengthen below the structure according to what is convenient.
And then consider all the disposings that we have recommended in other fractures, thus as abscess and similar to those in which it opposes all accidents with what is convenient for it until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
And it happens to some species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm joint, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, it corrupts below, and it is from those causes that are not to your ameliorations.
And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligament of the stars according to that joint.
More often it is said, if the fracture of the leg is already having many satieties, that the extension should be less and lighter, and it alleviates your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you joint the stars and complete all the tie of operation, then you take weights from the foot of the palm tree, which is placed below the causes that are paused in solitudes; and so make essays of branches of palm; alleviate those to the ones that are petite greatness, and do not be gestures of the hands, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the kneecap to the foot.
And then envelop each drap in two enveloping bandages according to the length of it, and pause one on the division of the leg of one part and the other of the other part, and similarly from the ankle to the lowest part of the foot.
And then bind the two stilhes in three places of both extremities and at the middle place, because in this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left sides, and it stands for good stability.
And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
And it is better to make sure that you do this in a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you guard against aposteme and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then pause to apply what is good to enter so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 17.
About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The ankle does not always fracture entirely; rather the bones of the foot sometimes fracture in certain places; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and do not fracture unless there is great violence in the means of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot receive a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above themselves, then the patient pauses to put their foot on the ground prepared thus like a crab.
And then pause to put one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and envelop those so that they return to their places.
And then pause to apply an emplaster and stop there, and then place underneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are attached two flat plates.
And then strengthen that with the foot in a descending structure, since you have enveloped that with draps and other causes of which I have already spoken.
And when you pass three or four days, then you remove the bandage, because you will find the bones enveloped, or stuck together, or displaced, and the operation on those is thus as it was conceived.
But if some toes are stuck together, then restore them, and envelop them thus as you were instructed and recommended to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then pause to put the stuck toe straight according to the length of the toe, and it will be held by one part of the foot; and then place underneath the foot this table that I have recommended to you, and strengthen that in a descending structure.
But if that which is stuck to the bones is two or three or more, then you pause on each toe thus according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and it stands upon one of the plates of the table outside the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you must consider all the causes which I have told you about in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause to apply everything to each accident so that it may be good.
Chapter 18.
About the fracture of the hip joint of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the wound of the man.
When the hip joint of the woman is dislocated, then make her sit in a chair, and then bend her towards the back of the chair with a small pillow, and it should be held behind.
And then the midwife should put the hip joint in its place, and it should be done in the hip joint thus as one expects; and then the woman should be struck, and elevate her back a little at a time, because all that is forgotten until it is demonstrated in the hip joint thus as one expects and the dislocated bone returns.
And then pause to put poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the hip joint thus facilitated and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which you started, and then return to the first poultice.
And do it thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you wish, take once a small vein of a sheep and strengthen it over the tract of the hip joint with a canal of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the hip joint, and then blow into the canal with great virtue until the bladder is inflated within the hip joint, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with hip joint and stayed for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the thigh of the man or woman is dislocated, then administer in the restoration and adjustment of it that which we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is direct is not hidden in these proximate fractures and little happens, mainly to one who has some study and use and understands my free book; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via directness in the restoration and structure of it, and therefore it is good.
When the man's groin is constricted, take a poultice of warm water, and place it there; then pause over the wrapped area with a cloth, and let it be enveloped, and pause for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fracture of the bones when one is afflicted with plague.
It is convenient for the one to whom fracture with plague happens, and it is even more so if the bone is large, thus as the bone of the hip or of the joint, or similar to that, that you take care and perform bloodletting at that time, if the conditions of bloodletting are suitable for you or they have been described above.
And if the plague is flowing with blood, then it is necessary that you take care to retain it in this way, so that you sprinkle above the injured place, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess happens.
But if an abscess happens cautiously, then you delay the restoration of it until the sixth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of all, lest you cause a bad accident.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered knee, then it is necessary that you perform reduction and enwrap it with your hands in a facilitated and minimal extension.
But if the extension is not prepared and the equality of it with your hands is not as expected, then you reduce it with your hands as much as possible; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers and its width is according to the quantity of the plague; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take into account those three or four things according to the quantity that is needed for the cure in all types of fracture.
And it should be rounded, and it should be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over during the compression on it at the time of the operation.
And it should be of sharp extremity where the margin is on the seven extremities; and it should be below the large tendon, tending towards the middle of the parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the instrument be paused, elevated above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And push it in a gentle way until the bone returns to its place, and it is enwrapped with some equality.
And then it is necessary to enwrap the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone in all ways that we have recommended, then you insert it in one of the incisions that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in some manner that is possible for you.
And then scrape away what remains in the bone of roughness and of small scabs.
And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the patient's vehement pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do it because you confer great benefit to the patient.
When the restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in seven stipulations of black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the clear plague nor another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas at the time of the complete compliment of the bone's restoration, and leave the uncovered plague in such a way that you insert the tube with forceps and uses of envelopments according to the quantity of the plague.
And beware that you do not strengthen the plague in the fracture, lest many vain efforts are made by foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting mortification, thus it is sanity. And if the structure of the bone is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear about those evil accidents which we have recommended, and it causes pain in the place, then it does not matter that you pause over those stelas, but rather do that envelopment of harsh cloths in place of stelas and strengthen them with those.
And when you begin to treat the plague once or twice a day, which in it is generated virtue, then you remove from below the cloth that you had placed over it for six days, and then administer some warm poultices, enveloping them with those of our customary practice, which is to medicate the plagues, thus as we envelop tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
It is convenient for you to remove the ligament and consider the plague in each day's morning and evening, until it is consolidated and fixed, and see that the member is prepared in such a way that the purging of the bad humor is facilitated from the affected parts.
If the plague passes several days, and it is not consolidated nor has it receded from the arm, then you know that here are the signs of the small ulcers because they try to inquire about the plague in attempting. And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated and touch the member and make it ache, therefore try to incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you find the plague in an ulcer or wound, it is symptoms, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you know that one of those has preceded the narration in the seventh chapter.
And of that, you know that it is my best sermon and you present your work: when the gross is treated, enemas are administered over the member just as with the bones of the thigh and the helper, and they seem similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction for four motives feared death; having laid aside that entreaty which you would strengthen, for twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if not, lay aside that.
Chapter twenty.
On the cure of nodes that occur in the vestige of some fracture.
Many feared nodes occur in the vestige of healthy fracture, and it increases because it is close to the joints, and it is obstructed by the figure of the member; and it strongly prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the node is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipulated as aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all, and combine them, as they are stipulated with wine, or album of urine, or with agreeable things, and pause it over the node in a stop, and constrict them around it for good consolidation.
And leave the extract there for several days; and then dissolve it and add another, until the node is reduced; or stretch over that layer of lead decently, because lead has the property of reducing all that which is inflated in the members.
Maybe the node is already converted into a stone and it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contrition, and then you separate it from the superior part of the member, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or scrape that with certain remedies until it is reduced; and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter twenty-one.
On the restoration of fractures when it is restored and then returns to its subtle and free member, following the seventh natural law.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and then returns to its subtle and free member, it is not done except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the loosening of the fixed point, not following what is known; or by superfluity of structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from running to the member; or by multitude of superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not in its hour; or by paucity of health in the body of the patient and for debilitation of it.
And the cure of that is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put gauges and lotions on them.
And then pause the poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it more nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with tepid water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter twenty-two.
On the cure of treated bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is known.
When you reach the member already restored to health from tortuousness and eminence to the treated bone and node, and it is because of that fededa of the form of the member, maybe I will empower the member not to be prohibited from its natural operation, then you do not know that you receive the word of him who existed before that member was newly treated.
Maybe I have stated many foolish doctors and restorers who have done that on our earth; and this operation is very detestable, producing great fear of the sign which is mortal.
Maybe the claudication and node are recent, then you know that they are embrocated with tepid water in which they collect soft mollifying herbs, just as they are fuels of altea and razit of it, and mellilot, and similar to those; and it is done to them in a mollifying emplaster just as dyallaquilon has been done; or that they take mucilage of razit of altea and are continued with gray gualina or oil of cirami, and are embrocated there; or that they take fat figs and are trissaded on the wombs of colom, and similar to those of the medicines that are named for external consolidation.
Some medicines are dissolved in a continuous friction that reaches the most humid parts, and administration of movement to the entire limb should be done at all hours.
Perhaps it is twisted and gone inside and made strong and converted into a stone and provoked the necessity of a cure with iron, then it is necessary that the pus be drained from above and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and something that supersedes the nodes of that limb be incised, and facilitated administration be given in that solvent and studied.
Chapter 23.
On sermon in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the shape of the limb is altered, and it brings upon the patient great pains and large lesions.
Therefore when accidents happen due to a dislocation, it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason it is necessary that the limb not be moved or stretched at the time of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasms and intense pains.
Perhaps when it happens, it is necessary that you apply the flaubotomia to the patient's vein, and then place it so that the inflammation subsides; and then wrap the limb with hot water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
And the entire limb will be cured by the same method by which the memory of the pain will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
The two lower jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are pulled back to their places with little movement, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and complicated, until they are softened at the joint so that saliva from the patient flows out and cannot hold it nor clear their mouth, and their tongue is enveloped in their speech.
Perhaps when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major arrangements it returns to its natural position for a slight cause.
Perhaps if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary to administer reduction of the limb immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and meanwhile places his fingers on one side of the jawbone in the root of the dislocation of the lower jawbone inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he places both fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are below them which engage; and orders the patient to release their jaws and free those from any part; and the minister engages the jawbone and pushes it in until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy and does not delay the reduction of both at all, thus we have said.
And then when they return and are engaged, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place upon those powders of dry cerate, and make it into a wax and oil mixture; and then bind it with facilitated linen bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be steady between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left side; and do not force them to eat any food; having forbidden the usual food, until when the pains are reduced and the jawbones are numb, then let them eat what they want.
And that is administered with ease, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth unless there is eating and drinking and citation, until the jawbone is numb and healed.
And if the reduction of two jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not converted to their proper places, then many times it happens that fevers and continuous sweat occur, and strongly irritates the patient's stomach, and strongly vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times death occurs to the one to whom this happens in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint inside the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated to the front part, and that is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and stretches out his arms. Then press the area with your palm in a strong pressing, because it will return to its place.
Then put a pause on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
May the extremity of that which is injured be continuous with it, not displaced on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to your preparation.
And then put a pause on that plaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And in this manner the cure is reduced, the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
It is known that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
And the second is that it is dislocated from above the muscle, and this is done harshly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
And mainly it is dislocated and afterwards exits at the lower parts of the thigh, and mainly in those where the flesh is sparse, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is exited with difficulty.
And therefore accidents occur to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot abscess, and it is cooked through that which was already dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you spread it out until you are above-certainty of it, and then you will proceed with the cure of it.
And it is known that the dislocation of it is at the lower parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because you find among them a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the thigh, near the joining of the head of the muscle, as if it were an ounce, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his own finger, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, then you will find a manifest joining, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the upper parts; and then pauses with his fingers below the thigh, and strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and stretches it out in its own; and then pauses below because it returns lightly.
But if it does not return through what we have said, and so from the beginning of the treatment that causes the dislocation, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a softening embrocation that mollifies and liniments, as if it were a coytz root, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient is placed on his back and paused below the thigh, waiting for a day or two that it be bandaged between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor pauses his hand over the spine, and raises the head of the muscle to its proper place, and attaches the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at the lower parts, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not hidden at the lower parts, because it readily returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make a pressure on the man who is longer than the patient, and is on the side of that bed, and inserts his muscle below the thigh of the patient and raises the thigh to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of the back. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that he is heavy, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another manner: and it is that it is fixed on the ground a long beam whose head is rounded in figure, like a pile of mortar, which is neither large nor subtle, and then paused below the patient; because being paused on the head of the beam draws the patient, and the patient stands according to the length of the beam, and then his hand is extended to the lower parts of the other side; and his body is extended from the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its proper place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a beam of the quantity of which is in length of two arms, and the width of that is of four fingers, and the thickness of it is alleviated on the surface of the thigh according to this form.
And put on top of the red hot cupping glasses to draw out bad humors so that they do not accumulate in the patient.
And put the patient's little finger in place, and extend your hand or arm over the fist inside towards the divided parts, and place the fist over the helpers and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Put your arm on a scale of steps according to the latitude, and the hand is extended towards the divided parts, and the other thing is suspended from the other side, so that the internal joint is straightened as much as possible.
And with the instrument of it is completed according to whatever manner that is possible for you, and then cover how you pause the little finger spare from the wool of goat's quantity; and put a plaster prepared from powder of moly and album on all the muscles, thus which is revolved from above, and put strength in the little finger with decent structure; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and let it be, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
And let the food of the patient be paused a little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring health to him.
And give the food in a larger quantity around seven or eight, and then exercise a movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated more times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be administered in three tracts, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days are delayed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and structure are reduced over certain affected parts, and it is not strengthened and can't be elevated, that arm to the upper parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the feet and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is made with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And another structure should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it affects the health gravitating in the member and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many remedies until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially from the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls under your gaze or under your touch according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip in its place, this is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that highest muscle.
And it is necessary to adjust the hips, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible from the beginning, because if you come to the apostema stage, difficult is the reduction of it, and far from being completely healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many remedies are used in that, even unto death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand should be extended with two hands, and its arm should be expanded, and the hands of the metge are placed over the hip and under it, and the fingers grasp the joint with the tips of their own hands, or at the base of their palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns also by bending the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that extremity with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And put it revolving the arm from all parts, because it is enveloped with a double bandage over its hand, or ligament.
And when the metge touches the joint with its hand, until it is anointed with some oil for that it should be those causes which help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then grasp the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that plaster in which it is stipulated and exception with album of goat's, and is strengthened with decent structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and let it be for several days.
And then it should be dissolved; and so if the joint is formed in that place, then you dissolve the ligament of it and release it.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you iterate the plaster and ligament, and release it for some days until it is externalized; and then dissolve it.
Maybe you should hasten to reduce the joint's gravity, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humid cooling in baths and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint a cooling poultice of motile grass; and then dissolve, and release it over the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in baths; and when it sweats, then you scrub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over that alleviated, so it is rounded by motor, once a day, and the second, and the third. in immersion of baths, until it is cleaned.
And if you want, place on that wound of moist and scaled skin with bandage and strengthen over that; and do it several times, because that is moist and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter 28.
About the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder joint is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and contrary to other joints, maybe especially because velocity is needed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, provided that the place is properly positioned or that it does not accumulate in a post-dislocation tumor.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the doctor extends the hand of that one, and places his hand or palm over the proximity of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its own place.
Maybe especially because it should be considered if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent over the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one should be precisely on the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over that proximity of the joint.
And then it returns soon, good; and if not, then strengthen that with an immediate post-dislocation plaster cast and release it; and do not iterate that, because if not, you will not suffer nor put pressure on the reduction of it anymore, as long as days pass.
Maybe the Roman joint is according to its twist; and do not notice any cause in the patient, but rather that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are pinched or compressed, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the confinement of it and fortifying its confidence.
Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the plaster cast which we have recommended, and let it be strengthened and released for five days; and then dissolve it and release it, and the hand of it should be exercised.
Maybe if the movement of it is stopped and accumulated in some gravity, then you will anoint it with hot water and make some gentle friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
About the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Several times it happens that the toes are completely dislocated.
And when some toe among those is dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and release it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until the third day when it will be equalized in that same day.
And when it will be night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to unbind it in the day and exercise its movement, and bind it at night; and do it for several days until it is straight.
And do similarly to that, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and do a similar first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do it when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter 30.
About the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When some of the vertebrae of the back or neck are completely dislocated, and many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death catches the patient.
And it is said that the evacuation of the patient is beyond his will, and he cannot retain it; and many times some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it are mollified, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times it is made to remove those in four parts.
Therefore, it has already been shown in the previous parts and named swelling of the ankle.
Maybe the treatment of it is that sometimes you should think about whether the ankle swelling is caused by weakness, because sometimes there is no cure for it or total healing.
Maybe in this case, you should try by massage or percussion or similar to those, the Ancients discovered various methods of treatment that are excessively verbose; maybe it will return with more profit; maybe you have already experienced relief from that which has little excuse for the multitude of it, due to the proximity to the immediate intention, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments of that, which I will show and explain.
And of those, none are cured except for the one that occurs properly on the back, which is what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be placed with their face down on a pillow near the wall, and extended below them is the instrument much more for so that the foot of theirs is not hindered.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bed.
And one minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the patient's head and below tie the bandage firmly; and extend the extremity of the bandage to the stick which is behind their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other bandage around their thighs at the knees, and around their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is behind their feet.
And then the minister should carefully extend the bandage to the part of the stick, and do not remove the two sticks and the bandages from their proper places where they are fixed, maybe meanwhile it is not fixed thus as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its position, or he should place them on that one table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table so that they return to their proper position.
Maybe if it does not return to its position by this method, then take a table on which the width or length is in the air at three spans, and carve into the wall where we have said that it is proper for the patient, a place where the extremity of the table enters. And then place the flat part of the table on the spine, and the doctor should place their feet on the other extremity, and stretch it until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, take the one that is turned around in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground behind the patient's head at the back of the two sticks, the length of which should be one arm, and behind their head just the same two sticks; and let the length that is between each stick be a palm, and already it is done on each stick through which the turn occurs, and each one should be firmly fixed in the ground so that it is not moved.
And let there be a circular stick on which the turn occurs, and let it be turned around in the two grooves of the two sticks.
And at the extremity of it is a groove in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is turned around; and on the two other sticks it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the bandages that have been stretched on the feet of the patient in the groove which is behind their head, and the bandages that have been stretched on their thighs in the turn which is behind their feet.
And then there should be each turn and a minister who turns the turn with their hand, and the doctor should straighten the spine according to what we have said.
And then because the spine is returned to its position, and the place is straightened, then it is necessary that you apply an embrocation excitation in album of owl's blood, and then stop; and then apply on the embrocation like a table with a width of three fingers or around that, and its length should be the quantity that takes the place of the ankle swelling, and on the part of the spine.
And then it should be tied with the bandage that we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until they are healthy.
And if there remains some impediment in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines which soften and loosen be administered in administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place, a lamina of lead.
Some wounds that occur in the upper part of the spine, and are caused by dislocation; it is believed that those bones were already weakened because they did not receive proper treatment, which is why this medicine is so effective for you, since it strengthens your back.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not end up being dislocated solely, but also occur due to small movements and cavities.
And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated either to the inner side, or to the outer side, or to the front side, or to the back side.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner side, and rarely to the front side or to the back side.
And the sign of dislocation to the inner side is this: when you adjust the healthy leg with the affected one, it appears longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the affected leg cannot bend its knee towards the shin, and it is at that place where the tendon of the thigh becomes swollen from an abscess, so that the head of the thigh bone has deviated here.
And the sign of that one which is dislocated to the outer side is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one which is dislocated to the front side is this: the healthy leg expands according to its own measurement, but meanwhile it does not bend because of the pain in the shin, and if you force it to move and it cannot do so towards the front side; and its urine is retained and its tendon is swollen, and its walking is impeded on the ankle.
And the sign of that one which is dislocated to the back side is this: it does not expand the shin, nor can it bend forward because the tendon is bent, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the tendon is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in a different place.
Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and chronic, that it has already become accustomed to having that limb in that position, and you administer reduction according to its disposition, then it is not entirely cured; and therefore it does not receive proper treatment.
Moreover, in the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should try to reduce it by returning the joint to its place and extending it to the inner side and to the outer side, and moving it to the right and left, because it will return to its strength and does not require another treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare another treatment, and extend the leg from the part that is lowest, or with its own muscles, or with the ligament that is tied above the shin; and another treatment extends the hand of that one upwards so that it meets its own muscles below the ankles; and you strengthen the ligament over the head of the thigh bone, and hold another treatment to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
And its extension is either from the inner side to the ankle joint at the knee, or from the back side to the lumbar region.
And its extension is all of those in a single direction until the affected limb is elevated above the ground and remains suspended.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we spoke of in terms of proper treatment.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner side, it is necessary for the affected limb to be resupinated above the lateral muscle; and then pause the ligaments over the head of the thigh bone in that place where the head of the thigh bone and the shin meet; and then extend the ligament from the part of the ankle joint to the outer side of the knee.
And then another strong treatment takes hold of its arms, and firmly grasps the large place of the affected thigh bone and extends to the outer side by vigorous extension, because it returns to its original place.
And this type is of more gentle treatment where this member is reduced than the other species.
Moreover, if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance into this type of complete treatment, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the affected limb together with a strong ligament, gently, above both ankles and both shins.
And its length is of each part by the quantity of four fingers, and the affected leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the affected limb is suspended above the wooden pole, and it should be in a balance; and its length from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
And then command a young strong man to hold the patient's head, and let him be suspended by another young man on the other side, and the other young man should hold the patient's arm in a stronghold, because the joint returns to its own place with velocity.
Maybe in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at the forefront, it happens that the patient falls onto the soft part according to what we have recommended in having gelbozitated; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
And then place two pillows under him, one at his feet, and the other at his head; and then place adjusted pillows under the middle of the fixed knee, over which drapes humid envolopes, so that the patient is not damaged by the pillow being between their thighs, so that the extension to the affected parts does not become irritated.
And then each minister extends to their own part, and the doctor puts his hand in guiding the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the inner parts, then it happens that the leg is extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on the knee; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's loin, and then cuts away with the other hand, and in that cutting pauses the extension to the affected parts at the part of the inner elbow.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it does not happen that the patient's leg is extended to the affected parts, and it is elevated above the ground; having happened that it was placed on a hard cause, thus as happens the examination if their ankle is dislocated at the forefront, according to what we have said about its placement on two anchors; and it is on their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no disorder.
And it happens that compression administration is applied to the table on the area where the joint is located.
Then, since the reduction is completed as it happens — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those engagements and the patient stretches out their leg and expands their excuse, then you know that the member has returned to its place as it should be — and then you adjust both thighs and place a bandage and stretch towards the bend so that the ankle is not bent in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those engagements in stability, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore the patient can walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and replaster that, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and leave it for three days.
And then release that, and make it wait in ambulation about certain hours a day, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated at the forefront, and at the inner parts, and sometimes at the back parts; and it is not dislocated at the inner elbow.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the elbow is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient rise straight, so that they extend their leg, if possible; tie the two thighs to the chair, and place their foot between the two legs; and then make them hold the elbow with both palms, and return those between the two fingers on the elbow in a stronghold, and another minister extends the leg until the elbow returns to its own place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a lifted non-labored way.
And then replaster that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release that.
And do not use the patient for ambulation for certain days, until they are healed and comforted.
Maybe if the reduction of it is excessive, then administer strong extension to the ligaments of those in the treatment of the preceding narration on the cure of the ankle.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes receives a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completion, and the dislocation of it is made either at the inner parts or at the forefront.
And the sign of their dislocation is that the ankle becomes inflamed, proceeding from the part which is dislocated.
Maybe the cure of their relocation is to relax it gently, and it is that it should be extended with facilitated hands and inserted back in so that it returns.
Maybe in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to its complement, you should make the patient straight, and hold that one firm and strong minister behind the back of that one in the middle place of it.
And then you will straighten the foot with your right hand on the upper part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the place of the ankle.
And then you will pull the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two steps, and then extend with your left hand; and you will empty the weight of the foot from the leg to the three points of balance.
And do two steps according to what we have counted.
And then you will empty the weight of the foot onto the leg at the third step, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one step or in two according to this manner, and if the foot is inserted well, it's good; and if not, then you will repeat the operation, because that returns.
Maybe if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and stretch a bandage firmly on the earth, and let it hold between the thighs of him, and you have enveloped it around the drap so that it does not dislocate.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the foot with its hands or on the lien that lies over the ankle of the foot; and then extend each minister against the extension of the back, and the bandage is extended between the thighs of the patient retaining it, so that the body of it is not attracted to the lower parts from its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, because the dislocation returns to its ease.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and stretch that strongly with a lien, and bind the foot to the leg.
And you should fear or beware of the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the lien over it is not violent and holds it firmly.
And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the lien is loosened, stretch it out.
And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. Maybe if you are forced to delay in that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not dissolve and corrupt, and then it will not receive a cure.
And if you reach the aposteme carefully, then you should minister in the sedation of it with what we have written before, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is remedied.
Chapter 34.
On the Cure of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
You should hold what is dislocated with little extension of its three points of balance; and that which is not difficult, because it is easier.
Maybe if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you should make the patient sit on the ground or on a table, with their foot held in place as if it were steady.
And then you stand by the foot, and pause the whole foot on what you have imagined from the joints, and then calcify it with the whole foot in virtue until it returns, and see that it is already held and does not appear in the eminent place.
And then pause below the belly of the foot on a table that holds the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen it with a decent structure and firmness for three days; and then remove it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the Species of Dislocation that are made with plague or fracture or any other evil symptoms.
When you reach some cause of those, and you persevere in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many steps succeed each other until death.
And for that, you should not presume on the cure of it, but rather he who is wise in the art, from long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and uses at the beginning of medicines that cast aside such solacing apostemes, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, except for him to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of malady, and in which appears some hope. And therefore it is necessary to delay the reduction at the beginning of the cause, since you will encounter a cautious aposteme.
And then if the limb returns to its proper function, then administer a regimen that will eliminate the post-inflammatory swelling and cure the wound so it does not become inflamed again.
And if the dislocation is due to a fracture and the separated vertebrae are affected, then you perforate the statement of theirs, and do so in a way that has been said in simple maladies of this type, which precedes in those places.
And beware and avoid according to your virtue that which is inserted in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my prediction; for it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent will be your glory, and more salutations to your body truly revealed in your time. Thus you will finish the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly, which ones God may not bless. Amen.
