Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequences, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you complete what you want in this treatise, which is divided into operative parts, so it is surgery.
Since the operation of my hand is spread out in our region and in our entire private time, until the very few people who possess the science of it, and its vigilant sight has been stopped; and there remains no remainder of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and its art.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this hand in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come with the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as it is for addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why there is no artist who has mastered this art in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires the actor to have been exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen reconstructs until he knew the juices of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their position; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their sentiment.
And for this Hippocrates said that a name is vain, more in small works, and greatly in the art of medicine.
We have already said this at the beginning of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they were formed in this science and got away from that science and its experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who, in his imprudence, has caused a scrophilous aposteme to occur on the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman died between their hands.
And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a trope of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called it a futile effort to extract that stone, and I saw that due to the greatness of the stone and due to the disposition of the patient's body, I knew that he would die under my hands.
And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he made a bad incision on the patient's thigh, which was devoured by the fracture in his hip; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and asters, using strong stretching, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And I followed the dislocations according to their desires, and I followed the relaxation, and I followed the loosening for some days and commanded that they not disturb the ligament; and it was thus until the thigh and foot became apostematous, and I saw them going to perdition.
And you have already called it futile, and I had to dislocate the ligament, and consequently I achieved tranquility and thus relieved them of their pains.
But the corruption had already spread to the member, so that I could not contain it, and I did not cease to walk with the corruption in the member until the patient suffered.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the malignity of it was magnified in his lord's sense.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor is pure melancholic humor, therefore it does not fit that it would come from anywhere else, but rather it is in a member which suffers from everything, as if it were held hostage.
And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of my hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there is danger in the major dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where I found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it alone, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are fallen and firm.
And you will be on the better way by the grace of God to obtain salvation and laudable success, and you will leave behind the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you will put away your arms from what makes you fear, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you will not be evasive: because more remains of your glory, and thus also in the world and afterwards among your sanctities.
Because the disease has been diagnosed in certain morning hours: There is no medical treatment for evil, since bad doctors are not named.
And you have devoted this book to three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first of the primary partition. The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrules of the cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second partition. The second chapter, on scarification and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similarities to those, all capitulated and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of torso correction and of similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
I have described the quality of the youthful judgments of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complexity it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the youthful judgment of cautery and its instrument is a long and prolix sermon, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me it is enough to take a little from their sermons, fearing prolivity.
And therefore I say that cautery corresponds universally to all complexity, whether it is matter or matters, except for two complexities, which are warm complexities of matter.
In warm and dry complexity of matter they disagree; for some said that cautery is suitable for that, and others said the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in evil matter which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that evil matter warm and dry be healed by cautery and dryness.
And they said to him who says the opposite, that by cautery it is made youthful judgment in all warm and dry evil matter that is seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity with the complexity of fire, you will find the body of man cold.
And I say through the sermon of that, that experience has already revealed to me many times what I have discovered.
Moreover I do not think that anyone will surpass what has already been experimented and exhausted in the chapter on cautery through previous exercise, and to know the diversity of the complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of their evil matters in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those.
Moreover in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid evil matters, because already all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree on the youthful judgment with cautery in those.
And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so on cautery I make medicine combining, because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is a small nuisance.
Moreover the action of combining medicine reaches to that in the members which are affected by it, and strengthens them to come into the difficult-to-heal member and strengthens them to listen.
Moreover fire, by its sublime nature and good substance, does not do anything except to overflow. And it is already known to us through experiment and lengthy service of studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have been excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my book on this passage to you secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the evacuation by which it expels evil matters, a philosophical demonstrated sermon, which would be acutely inserted in your pages.
And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to do cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the youthful judgment of that which I have done with cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fast, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared by those who come with evil, which is more than small harm entering at that time.
And thus I do not catch in your pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that evil matter which is healed by cautery, there is no return to all time, and they pause at that consequence.
And the cause is not thus because the doctors do not know that cautery is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries out the humors, which are the cause of the pains.
Perhaps emperor, I will place a superior cautery above medicine to show the value and virtue of its operation and greatness of your noble lordship.
And it is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in their body by the aggregation of superfluous humors, and that which they have acquired in their daily habits and semblance of those causes; but that the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in some members with few superfluous humors and humidity, thus as cautery of teeth for pain and semblance to that, it is possible that the pain does not return there, but rather is made small.
And it is a common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe that it is not a cure that advances with medicine nor another cause that advances with cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not because they administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer thus cautery, and it advances to that. And from here I will say that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and foolish doctors understand.
And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a break, as if it is not absolutely virtuous, because you have already proved and demonstrated that it does not make this except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; but emperor, when you make cautery with gold fire, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepare to receive freshness; and if you adjust above the ignited gold, it will melt into a pool, and sometimes in the pool certain laminas are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with it.
And therefore it is done to make cautery with iron, we should not push lightly and not postpone the rectitude of operation.
And now I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that it is clear to the demanding one what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the shoulders and ears, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and semblance in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate in medicine lacative the whole month, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and custom.
And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then to sit between his thighs on a bent bench and place his hands on his own feet.
And then he places the razor in the palm of his hand, placing the paws on the razor at the bridge of the nose between the eyebrows. Perhaps emperor, as the finger said from my middle place has arrived, it signs that place with a probe, and then lights the cautery iron of which this is the form:
And then he places it on the marked place with a probe, in a manner that descends, in which the finger of the hand is constricted little by little, and you revolve it.
And then he lifts his hand lightly and regards the place, and if you see already from the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then he lifts his hand, and if it does not turn to his hand in that iron, in another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the bone what I have said to you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it sit for three days.
And then place it on the wrapped cotton in a bundle and let it sit until the crust of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with four-part remedy until it is healed.
And I said that when the Roman plague breaks out, it is better to take the arm, because it is more beneficial and cures quickly.
I said that some of them should be cauterized on the back of the bone, and hold the cautery until it reaches a certain part of the spine.
And then it is necessary to adjust the bone, and then it should be cured.
I said that others should apply the cautery to the back, until it penetrates deeply into the bone and strengthens it so much that the bone breaks, and this is the method of healing a small fracture. And I believe that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
And it has been held in the open plague for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But I have never seen these two special kinds of cauteries, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, it is better for my health, when it is; because the head is deviated from the solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first kind of cautery is more safe and better for my health; and from that house and I do that work for my health.
It follows accordingly.
About the cautery of the head.
When the whole head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in a prolonged patient, and uses remedies such as poultices and bandages and plasteres and injections and catheters and girdles, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and atrophied much fear, then that cautery is another cautery beneath that one. And then cauterize that above the horn of the dry head with a cautery until the bone is divided. Cut the bone and discover the quantity of it that we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called "vas" — and it is that place where the wind is stopped. And lift your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient will feel much greater diverse pain than the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery which cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
The third chapter.
On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [or wandering] pains.
When pain dwells in the head and is stubborn, or it is a pain that penetrates deeply into the vein, then evacuate with medicines thatmondify the head, and administer another cure, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if there is no profit, then cautery is done in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
One cautery with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrub it and bind the extremities of it to both heads. And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the deep location beneath the bone, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen it above with a stopped constriction, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then dissolve it and extract the salt, and let the plague be for two or three days, and then pause over the submerged joint in a bandage until the place makes a scar.
And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, make some burning medicines, which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
One cautery with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cauterizing which this is the form.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus in the form of a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
And then pause over the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not disturbed — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it which is disturbed by the spine of the bone thus as much as its greatness, and hold your hand so that the artery is not disturbed beneath, so that there comes no flow of blood.
And then soak the joint in salt water and pause it over the place, and let it be for three days; and then hold the joint wrapped in a bandage, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, burn the extremity of the gut with a cautery according to the cautery, and beware not to make an incision in the artery during this emigration, lest it become non-ancient.
Fourth chapter.
On the cautery of ancient emigration.
When you treat emigration as we have said about previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not last with what we have said of the first cautery in medicine or of the cautery in focus, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery tool until it is whitened, because it indicates above the line of the long disease where the greatest pain is, or whatever; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen that before you incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
It is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by the action of chewing, and that the tendon does not become inflamed and the nerves do not undergo evil, lest there be no spasmodic contraction.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and greater to that which ignores what it does and is not studious and experienced; and thus begins the operation on it at the commencement.
And you will find in remembrance of the rule for the flow of blood by chance of the artery according to the usual manner, in the same place of this free book.
And if you see that this illness does not last with this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, burn it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stricture of artery by cautery having two sides, and it is a better cauterying this way and more convenient.
Chapter five.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with causal laxatives and another treatment which has been said in the division, and the pain does not diminish, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named punctual, of which this is the form.
And place the point at the ignition, and it should be led around the entire ear thus as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of some things if the pain is somewhere. Also, you have the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, because then you will feel the place in tension.
And if you make points of the cautery throughout the entire ear, and thus it is, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Chapter six.
On the cautery of gout.
Gout which is treated and with cauterying is not only of the species that come by flow, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of gout with roots and head-purgings and garglings, and do not complete your treatment, then it is necessary to cautery the illness with three cauteries: the first makes the root of the ear, and the second a little below the same temple, and the third makes the conjunction of two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite of the ailing part, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterying is that you cautery it with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, thus elevating a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the said bone, and pause your hand at the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specificity of the codena is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the gut, the form of which is demonstrated in a table. Moreover, it is necessary to subtily burn a little thus as you see; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive fatness a little.
And then cure the place where it is demonstrated by process until it is healed.
Chapter seven.
On the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and do not complete your medicine and the illness has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: above all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, thus as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said below.
And you have been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more serious; and then you should be carefully treated so that the procedure progresses.
Chapter 8.
About the cauterization of oblivion made through weakness.
Because they have given to the patient in the beginning of the illness great and powerful pills, magnificent servants.
And then you should take off the entire head of the patient and place it on the wooden board of that described instrument in the treatise on instruments.
And place those few burned areas, because that is the manner of cauterizing. And do it according to those methods in order, which I have already said.
And then if the patient is not better; and if so, then make three cauterizations on the rear part of his head, which are dependent on the upper part of the head going into the part below the neck. And place between each cauterization the thickness of the digit, and then take care to make the cauterization so that it proceeds.
If you find that the patient is more tolerant, then make the cauterization in the middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Then take care that it enters so that it heals; and let the olive-shaped cauterization be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
About the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the entire body.
Because you should proceed in magnificent decoration of the head with jars and as we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a pointed cautery on the middle place of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize on the rear part of it, and make three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those patients who are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cauterization so that it is combined with the coding motion of it, and lift the dead flesh. And then take care that it enters so that it heals, and let this olive-shaped cauterization be.
Chapter 10.
About the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to weakness.
And then it is necessary to decorate the brain of the patient at the beginning of his years and another cure which we have described in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gentle and soothing servants of magnificent decoration, beforehand with those for many days, in the blessing of the foods.
And then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a pointed cautery on the middle place of the head according to the preceding manner, and another cauterization on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head it should be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that I have said, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive-shaped cauterization be according to what has been previously stated.
If the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
About the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great weakness, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that we have said in having paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous and declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give to drink what purifies the brain of it according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And then take off the patient's head, and then make a gentle and decent torture of those things above the circle, and then place it in the middle place of the head.
And the patient should be seated comfortably, and should be held firmly by all parts.
And then place a liniment; it is better to use an ancient remedy for old wounds. And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which is said to be sufficient when it is mixed in it. And then put that in the middle place of the head of it in the circle, and let it enter so that it is refreshed.
And do it so that the patient is in total recovery one time, with another regimen of good being until it is healed; or if you want, cauterize it making small points according to the size of it, but holding the hand with a pointed cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humidifies the brain in equality.
And then stop that constricted gut in a bath or in wraps of warm water.
Chapter 12.
About the descent of hot water into the vein.
When you have declared the commencement of hot water into the vein through the channels which you had previously designated in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient whose head you will modestly cover, and guard against all humidity.
And make that sugar dissolve in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that same place with a cautery; and then cauterize that same place with two cauteries on the two temples if it is the commencement of the flow of hot water into two veins, or one side if it is the commencement of the hot water in one vein.
You will cauterize all the veins and arteries that you had previously indicated in the code; and place the cauteries at that length in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, stop with some medicine, which is as possible for you.
And you will find the wisdom which is in extraction of arteries and absorption of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized at the neck below two bones with two cauteries, which subsequently produce a separation.
Chapter 13.
About the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the veins are old and worn out and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that same cautery which we have recounted in the chapter about the commencement of hot water flowing into the veins, and cauterize in the same place on the head and with two cauteries on the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries on the neck below the bones. And if you need addition, then cauterize that in all length of the vein on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
About the cauterization of nasal discharge.
When you treat that same thing which we have said in the division and do not hasten your treatment, then prepare and give to drink to the patient three nights; and place his head, and cauterize with a cautery more mild than an olive-tree cautery. And then cauterize that same place with a clave-cautery and two cauteries on the two eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery which you do not injure there.
And this is the form of the clave-cautery.
Chapter 15.
About the cautery for softening of eyelids of the veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery according to this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a small one with two cauteries in all division, and it is prolonged to the temples. And it is the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
About the cautery of the eyelid of the vein when the hairs are converted into the internal parts and pierce the vein.
When the hairs of the vein are converted into the internal parts and pierce the vein, cauterize in those places according to two manners, because the cautery is either with iron or with a burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to hold still that which reads the hairs thus as those which are worldly, until they are prolonged and grafted; and if you pierce that which is not in its place, then strengthen the veins of that one with a band so that it is not moved until the hairs are born.
Then when they are born and grafted, then stop the head of the patient in the true seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of that one with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the commencement of the proper signal of the hairs.
And then stop constricted gut in a bath of warm water or in an application of poultice over the vein.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
And then cauterize upon the figure which has been signed, little by little, in well-regulated motions, until the surface of the code is burned, which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, totally and properly apparent.
The sign of good health in the body's work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already constricted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the eye.
So lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place your hand over the affected area to ensure that the scar is eradicated. And then cure that wound thoroughly until it is healed.
But if the skin returns to its original state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another pass with the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized, so that the skin does not puncture the eye.
But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift their skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a paper template in the shape of a mitre leaf.
And then take some soothing ointment and apply it to the living flesh of an unbroken wound. I think there might be a small mistake! It seems like you accidentally sent a single period instead of a new sentence to translate. If you meant to send a new sentence, please go ahead and share it, and I'll be happy to help! or that water, and then mix those causes well, and make that fastening per so that it is not frozen; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the shape of a mitre leaf, and place that over one eye of the patient, and place below the eye wrapped in albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient should be in the correct position.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in it as from fire.
And then as you perceive that the bitter taste is gone, then release the medicine and rub it on the finger; then cease the bitterness, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as it is washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was not applied and does not deteriorate until the operation is equalized and the eye is constricted.
And then place your hand over the affected area to ensure that the pain of the adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that wound thoroughly or otherwise until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep vigilant diligence so that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened over several days and some cause of skin punctures the eye, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it inwards until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a mitre leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men are diversified according to greatness and smallness, and thus according to what is done your contraction.
And it will not be forgotten the way of straightening to that one who has studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cautery of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head thus in the correct position, and hold the head of some minister between the eyes but in such a way that it is neither forgotten nor agitated in the correct head.
And then place the affected area wrapped in egg white or in a poultice of plant material over the patient's eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
which should be conical, thus as it is in the shape of a reed or a point of a turning pen, from one extremity to where the cautery is made.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as it was held.
But perhaps that which is burnt is better for the body's work.
And then take out the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the blood and dry that area. And if it is not opened, then operate on that and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery that is well ignited, and you have that in your hand a little while before the cautery of the eye at the bridge of the nose, so that it does not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the corners of the eye and corrupt that.
And then at the beginning of the eye cautery, you see into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place your hand over the affected area to border and wrap it in a dry dressing until it is healed.
If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
And it is another manner of cautery for a fistula, which the ancients first discovered: then at the place of the fistula and make a hole there and stop in that fissure subtly as its form allows; And put there a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you hold your hand firmly with good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover that you place over the hollow of the patient with an album of egg white or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed in that which we have spoken of concerning the cautery and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body according to how it will come into its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the fracture of the toes.
Crushed herbs applied to the fissures on the lips, and especially to the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures in that which we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your care, then ignite the small cuticular cautery according to this form that is written:
And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the skin.
Then stop putting that initiative carefully into those fissures until the cautery penetrates to the root of the fissures.
And then take care of that with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess is formed and then it breaks, and then it ruptures, and then it becomes chronic, and you correct the break and it is made into a fistula, and then you cure that and do not deepen your care, then stop igniting the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignition in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the root of it, and afterwards make an application or two; and then take care of that as we have said concerning the cure until it is healed.
And so if the wound is abscessed and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to how it will come into its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cautery of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loosened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then stop placing the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come thus, even so that you place the scalpel over the tooth and enter it there the ignited cautery festinatingly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and then iterate the cautery with some crushed herbs according to what you want.
And then the patient should hold their mouth full of salt water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the loosened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is stiffened and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter 21.
On the cautery of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or there is a worm or vermin in it, or it does not confide in the cure with medicine, then cautery is applied to that in two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in iron water, and then take it out and wrap it over the extremity of the tent, and then submerge it in boiling water, and stop it on the painful tooth festinatingly until it is cooled.
And then iterate that with some crushed herbs until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the flax or cloth in the aforementioned cow's horn, and stop it on the painful tooth, and stop over that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Moreover, the emperor forbids the cautery with fire unless you attend to the quantity of iron or of fire, and it is in the heart of some gross ulceration and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and make some crushed herbs because the pain will be relieved or on that day or on another day.
And you should cover the area where that cautery touched the patient's good mouth with a bandage, and hold it for an hour, then remove the dressing; and this is the form of the cautery.
You should cauterize at the point where you see extreme pain, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the pipe or tube.
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of crooked toes.
When toes are crooked due to flux and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines, and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is thus, having two burned extremities so that the fumigation comes out of the cautery through the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if you indicate that of it, until you reach the root of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause on the inflamed area in a good way until what the fire has consumed is removed.
And then heal that wound with ointments and dressings until it is healthy.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of hernia and constriction of the spleen.
When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with cold complexity, then cover that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which goes to the root of the ulcer in the pre-affected area.
And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery to the ulcer nor burn the skin of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery which goes to the joint of the spine at the back of it. And the cautery of it should be clavilated according to the previous manner.
And then heal that wound which has been previously mentioned until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
When coughs and diseases of the lung are from cold humors and the patient has no fever nor tisis, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the pre-affected areas of the loins and hips; and with another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be clavilated according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, in the form which precedes in the pointing of pain of the ears.
And make points until they reach those; and then heal that wound which has been previously mentioned until it is healthy.
And thus the cautery has three ramps because cauterization is thus: in one way you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of twitching that is at the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stop at the hour of its return, until it returns to its usual custom, and then by a small movement it is displaced thus that it ends, thus as we have testified, then cover that primarily you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is reversed over the two or on the side; and then elevate the skin which is in the upper part of the citillic to the parts above with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated above.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form.
And then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And some occasions are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cautery, which is good for salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and it is thus done, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilated cautery or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and many humors come into the stomach, extracting its complexity and thus multiplying the raumases within it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confuse, then cover that the patient is on their back with their arms extended and their thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a clavilated cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the chest; until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate among those who are not adjusted, so they will not make an error.
And if the depth of the cautery reaches the quantity of the two stubborn roots of the greatness of the codena.
And the shape of the cautery is added in this way, And if you want, make a great cautery in the middle of the stomach in this way; and let it be a cautery in the form of a circle in this way.
And the stomach should be cautered at the point where it is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cautered in those points; and then cure with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
On the cautery of the fevered foot.
When the foot hurts from coldness or dampness or gross excess of wind that disrupts its normal complete function, and it is cured with water as we have said, and not comforted, then it is necessary that the malady be resupinated above its cervix, and you feel with a tender hand three cauteries according to this form and quantity measured on the foot below the hips, which perceives the decubitus of the same.
And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the greatness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the magnitude of the specificity of the codena, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the malady stands on its feet; and if it does not stand, then let it be seated, which has already extended its thighs, and elevated its shoulders.
And it is possible that you can cauterie these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the specificity of the entire codena be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the body and penetrates into the intestines, because the codena here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the malady becomes more grave and the pain is increased.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is greatly increased and sometimes the doctors are tired of curing it.
Therefore it is necessary that the malady be turned above its cervix; and then feel the place of the abscess with a tender hand; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rag, in the form of which I have written on the other page. And cauterie with that cautery until the entire codena is consumed, until it reaches the siphac, until it arrives at a healthy sanity.
And then cure it by curing other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not suitable that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are recognized; however, I have experimented with some vigorous practices being carried out above this operation, however, I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On the cautery of flatulence.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for flatulence are made according to this manner, being a doer, and it is that which you take from the roots of Aristology, a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the greatness of the finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it at the fire, and then cauterie with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one declining to the part that is beneath the beard, and make two cauteries on that which declines between the fifth rib and the cistern, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle of the foot, and another above the stomach, and three cauteries from the back parts; and make one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not suitable that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be in the manifestation of the codena in action.
And I have already said to the other ancients that they are similar to those of men who use iron cauteries resembling a ray and ignite them, and place them in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and healthy sanity is forgotten, just as we have said about the abscess on the foot.
More in this perforation I do not use cautery, because it often happens that an abscess forms at the site of the fistula, which does not heal.
Chapter xxx.
On the cautery of the spleen.
When you treat the disease of the spleen as we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cautery is done in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear incisions according to the length of the spleen, following the shape of the cauteries of the foot, whose shape has preceded.
And it is between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery is the same as we have said in the cautery of the foot, equally.
And do not comprehend your hand at the cautery; and the disease is evident on both sides of the back.
And there is another way of cauterying, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two vertebrae, which causes have been said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and it raises the codeine which is at the end of the spleen where it perceives the sinister influence of the disease.
And it is your elevation where you raise the codeine according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then introduce the two vertebrae, setting them in motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the codeine of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus you make four cauteries.
And if you wish, cautery with a cautery having three vertebrae.
And then you cure the cautery, so that it has laid aside to grasp or to hold for three days, because more often it is comfortable than the other preceding causes in the cure.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery of hydropsy.
Cauteries are not made in hydropsy except at a precise point.
When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which have been said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circuit of the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the spleen, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the specificity of the codeine.
And then leave the cautery open so that it holds for a long time.
And do not evacuate the disease from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary that they be added to the two intentions, and it will be fastened to the aid of health.
The shape of the cautery is what is cauterying the belly is club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is what is cauterying the back is olive-shaped according to its preceding shape.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are affected by hydropsy and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, in a place that is between the auricular and the anular, and raise your hand over the cautery and do not touch it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it completely, because the stagnant water resists.
The cautery is according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the extremity of the cautery, cuticular. And the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: one below the knee and another at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the open wound for a long time, so that some stagnant water may come out of it.
And then cure them with those causes which have been said.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the belly and intestines.
When the belly and intestines are cold and humid, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and bowels, and it is cured with those methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the suffering disease suffers from exhibiting cauteries of virtue, then cautery that with a large cautery on the navel according to what has preceded in the cautery of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the subtle circuit of the navel, with a club-shaped subtle cautery; and a cautery on the alcatin above great aloes, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities exhibit and the disease is tolerating, then cautery that on the peritoneum and on the bowels, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, because it is a perfect cure of juvament from which you do not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When old hemorrhoids in the nature of the body are caused by gross humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured with what has been said in the division and do not confer the usual cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small triangular spine, and cauterize underneath the umbilical region for two digits.
And if it happens that their stomach is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and make one cautery on the thigh, and another on the middle of their back with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time opened, and afterwards cure them from within so that they may be healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of athelia, appropriate for their abscesses.
When you abscess athelia, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. Then insert the ignited cautery into that abscessed athelia, and finally place your hand so that you reach the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes out.
And make a vein or two, because if they achieve healing, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and afterwards cure those with what confirms their healing from within so that they may be healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more suitable for youthful treatment.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the body in their divided parts.
When the nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with cauteries.
Therefore, when you have a fistula in the nature of the body, and it is old, corroding the sanity of the patient and corrupted humidity, and therefore it is more worthy that the covering is what proceeds with subtlety, and afterwards consider the quantity of the depth of the aforementioned tent.
Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the tent.
And repeat above that cautery within so that they burn those corrupted bodies entirely one, two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And then cure the place within so that it may be healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and you have abscessed from it the matters, and remained thus for a long time, then know that it has been entirely cured.
And if the matters have not been removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prison of the corrupted bone, or something from those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross windiness, and thus the hollow of the patient's thigh is affected, then it is necessary that you cauterize above the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clavicular cautery from which proceeds the remembrance.
And make a strong cauterization on the second small spine, so that three linear cauteries come, and then they will be more suitable for youthful treatment.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debility and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize above the part below on the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of the notes of the foot; and cauterize above with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix (womb).
When cold and humidity come to the matrix (womb), and thus conception is prohibited, and their menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there is pain in the vicinity of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical region, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery above the place below on the back, or two cauteries, and let the cautery be clavicular.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
When moisture accumulates and is stuck in the joint of the ankle, and it is caused by cold humors that settle in the lower part of the leg, and it is shown that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is palpated on the boy's thigh.
Then you should cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have felt it in the circuit of the joint thus as it is revolving, and so that the joint falls into its proper place within the circle.
And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that man with three cauteries or olive-shaped grande cauteries.
And this is the way to make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire spine; and then take care that it is healed within.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain goes to the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said before, and not confused, and that is antiquated, then you should release the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize him.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauterizes him on the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do so at a good depth. And that is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the said and if the olive-shaped or large cauteries.
Moreover, some veins are cauterized on the same place on the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the form is precised in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire spine.
And this is the manner of cautery in certain cases when pain is adhering to the ankle and does not extend within to the thigh.
Moreover, if it is extended within to the thigh, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the knee joint for four digits above the affected part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and this is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the spine.
And if the patient feels that the pain is extended to the place near the toes, then cauterize him here where he feels it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is suitable for him.
And if the patient feels pain below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him here with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that it burns nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nourishment or contradiction.
And I have already seen one or another of those who cauterized on the knee joint and ultimately in the cauterization, and the burning fire inflamed within so that the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong abscess occurred in the belly, and then this leads to death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joints, where this is the manner: make a circle of iron like a ring, the circumference of which is the width of a palm; and it should be of the same size as the thickness of a finger bone or slightly less.
And inside that circle is another circle; and the space between them is the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and those circles are separated into two parts; and the length of those channels is one notch or two notches, and make a decent iron margin in those circles; and this is their form.
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it is red-hot and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the ankle joint, the patient collecting himself on the side of the bed. And then cauterize him with three red-hot cauteries in one vein.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a poultice to the wound and leave it for many days; and then take care of him until he is healed.
Says Albucassis: Oh, my sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for that reason few have found those who regard it above.
More of those who suffer from cauteries on their body, and it is necessary to search for that place on their body.
Many cauteries are medical treatments that adhere to you making two circles having perforated armor in which they place the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the nakedness of their shoes, or those who have two nails or heels.
And if the spaces which are between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and there are holes above and below, and it is necessary to contain them among their following this form:
And then stop on the affected part of the water, the patient sitting on a mattress, and grasp your hand on the affected part of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and you do that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the adjustment of it — because that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate the hot water from all of the affected part into warm water.
And then leave that for three days and stop on that boundary until the blackness of the adjusted remaining parts, and leave that for several days, and correct their porridge; this is the last step in healing.
And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make a statue of it that contains water according to what is done in the affected limb.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of both hands on one affected part, and sprinkle them and stop in a new vessel where the affected part below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
And stop below the bottom of another vessel inserted, and gather above that alkaline and cause living with warm water which takes those for a finger, and since you comprehend those are good compression, and leave the hole that sends from the sharp water in the affected part below to the inserted vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another living cause and other alkaline renovating, because that hour will be very strong acuity, which is administered in many operative functions of medicine and in cautery of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And some of the medicines are those which are cautery-ized thickly, thus as you describe and mix and create a compound with a savory cause in such a way that they are well mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure with which he cures pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be that one, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed for a season thus as recommended, because strong he inserts in bath and thus already knows of that.
And it is that he takes certain green herbs, and if they are not found fresh, take recent figs; and much should be sprinkled in a few gray areas and stopped on the affected water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it is bound.
And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is relaxed, insert that into the soil, because the pain ceases and it is healed.
And I know that you do not need to use cauteries in these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Many times Escorides says that when an ulcer of a goat's vein is cautery-ized, it is beneficial for his body; and this is the cautery in his following manner: take wool and dip it in hot oil, and stop it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
And then take dry goat's fat and inflame that with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then stop it on the wool and leave it until it is extended. And then repeat that, and do not stop until the sensation of the biting pain passes into the water and stops the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cautery of cows.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Toes.
Some pains in the toes are caused by multiple causes, such as by contusion or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not effective except in this one species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore it is necessary, then evacuate the affected part with fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of the body, because you have tenths in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the affected part and its virtue.
And if it is necessary to make a pointed cauterization, do so with a pointed cautery.
If you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle, following this form:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Motions weakened by this illness in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble upon their structure, with difficulty in walking and movement.
And vertebrae in the upper part of the back and ribs that have already begun to overlie each other.
And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize with that cautery that is circular in shape. which takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the vertebrae, including the joint.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three. And place the points properly between them.
And then heal the area inside, which will be healthy with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manual way of cure and the pains are not relieved, then relief comes from cauteries.
And it is that you perform cauterization with proper evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
And the olive-shaped cautery is the one whose form is this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains penetrate into the teeth or other joints, and they are very weakened, then cauterize that over each tooth with three cauteries or four of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, just enough to surround the outer surface of the code.
And if the pains penetrate into the tooth and back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the jaws, and it is called scurvy, then puncture around the circle of the gums thus as they revolve, puncture in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the teeth, then puncture around the circle of the gums over each notch and over the edge of the hand.
And if the pains penetrate almost to the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected parts of the entire joint.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and weakness is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genitals, and it begins to suppurate, then you should order the patient to stay in their bed for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound of the seventh day may heal.
And then follow the patient between your hands over the seventh vertebrae, and command them to hold their seven wings within so that it may be firmly held or the cavity or intestines may not protrude.
And then return that to the teeth and sinew, holding the rupture over the bone of the pentagonal shape at the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the subdivisions of the body.
And then ignite the cautery whose form is this:
until it is very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery straight, and you will see that it includes the bone of the pentagonal shape into the middle of the forehead; and if it does not succeed in the first attempt, try again another time until it succeeds.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the hour of your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine so that on the patient no death or other great evil may come.
You should know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch the bone, and it does not interfere with your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle, according to their age and measure of theirs.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, until the scar is reduced by the heat.
And then take care of those who have other afflictions until they are healed.
The patient should sit on the warm seat for 40 days until the place and the wound are sealed.
And it is necessary to pause the nutrition of him according to the length of time of his cure, which relieves the stomach of him, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when one wants to get up after 40 days, then administer the decent and gentle treatment, and hold that for another 40 days.
And it is necessary to moderate the effort and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of health, they will be completely healed.
And you will direct the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that they do not hurt, then cauterize the rupture with the red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is what is exhorted from the codena, thus like the third part of it; and then take care of him who has said that, and it is not adjusted.
And you will find some first rupture experts who say that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is signaled in the tents:
and a paused line that is for the latitude in the lattice because it surpasses the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand on a clave cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of the thigh.
When pain is felt in some members due to a fall or percussion and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the entire member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of the thigh and pain of it.
Therefore if it is not healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then try again on him with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured in a member next to that one, so that it is necessary to continue with the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Some leprous wounds are treated with a cautery for great benefit, and magnificently if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And thus when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as that cure which we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends all of his body and all of its complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle place of the head, and one below it, and one at the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, above the nape or service.
And finally place your hand on the cautery a little while until it makes a small impression on the bone, and from it the scorched parts are dislocated, so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the worse places according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and cauterize on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on each vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each calf, and one on each ankle, and two on each foot, and one on each toe; and cauterize that on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the muscles, and on the tendons of the thighs; and treat them with those cauteries.
And beware of the nerves which are above the ankle that you do not touch them.
And some wounds are treated with a cautery on the bone of the pentangle and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And you should know that the more adjusted cauteries, the more beneficial and convenient they are; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus like the wise ones, because the body of him is already stupified.
It seems that the treatise is written in a Romance language, possibly a mix of Old Occitan and Medieval Latin.
"And then heal the cautery wounds with a poultice made from herbs, in a mixture of honey and another treatment within, so that it may be healthy."
"Chapter 48"
"On the Cauterization of Stupor (Fainting)"
"When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauterization according to the size of the member or its smallness."
"And let the fire of the cautery enter into the narrowness of the channel in a little while." "And then heal that one with an ointment until it is healthy."
"And sometimes some numbness is cauterized in certain stupors which affect the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and it is said that the numbness of the nerves is what moves that member, and the stupor is relieved."
"There is no progress on this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body."
"Chapter 49"
"On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea (a skin disease)"
"When ulcers are old and do not respond to the treatments of medical ointments, then you cauterize over them with a pointed cautery for a little while according to the quantity of the specific condition of the channel until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed."
"And then heal that one with a poultice made from herbs and lentils, with rose oil and leaves of agrimony, and the blood of pigeon or the blood of crane, each being a part and all are mixed together, and then place a bandage over it and leave it on for a while until it is healed."
"Chapter 50"
"On the Cauterization of Cancer"
"When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that one with a circular cautery in the circumference of it, just as it is turned around."
"And I advise the experts that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and yet I have seen some numbness."
"And it is better to cauterize in the circumference of it with a circle as we have said, or with many small cauteries."
"Chapter 51"
"On the Cauterization of Weakness (or Debility)"
"When some weakness is delayed in maturity, and thus it is due to the superfluity of making that, or because of the state of illness, since it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to restore it to maturity; then cauterize around its circuit with many small pointed cauteries; and afterwards let it be, for it will fasten in maturity."
"If you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you should ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause it in the middle place of the weakness until it penetrates the channel."
"And if you cauterize in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that one until it is healthy."
"Chapter 52"
"On the Cauterization of Corrosion (or Ulceration)"
"Corrosion is a corrupting disease that walks in the member, which corrodes it thus as a fire that consumes dry wood."
"Therefore, if you want to cauterize that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries with fire, then you should ignite cauteries with many small keys, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is."
"And then cauterize that entire part until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains."
"And then let it be for three days, and pause over the cauterized places with a mixture of oil and herbs until the scars are entirely eradicated and all corruption."
"And then heal that one with flesh-growing ointments."
"If then, after three days, the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains corrupted in the corrupt places."
"And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with sharp medicine, because that is mixed in place of cautery." "Moreover, emperor's cautery with fire is to be used for a lighter treatment."
"And I have said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in division, and so take that when its hours are ending."
"Chapter 53"
"On the Cauterization of Fractures and other Similar Things"
Swollen veins located at the affected parts of the foot, which are called claws, and it is a gross, inflamed cause, which hurts the foot; and it is treated with two kinds of cauteries, one with fire and another with hot water.
Maybe the cautery with fire is that which you should ignite the cautery resembling a ball of tow, which must be made of iron according to the quantity it contains in each claw of the entire affected part, and it should have subtle margins.
And then stop the ignited fire on the claw, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in a circular motion around the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw. And leave that for three days until you start to feel better. And then apply a plaster made with mallows and savings thrice crushed in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place affected by generating flesh until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and swollen veins accumulate on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer those cauteries with hot water, and it is that you take a small tube of iron or fire or ball of tow, and stop it on the claw; and put a little quantity of hot water, and hold your hand, and you rotate it with compression of your entire hand, and it should be inserted into the margin of the tube in the root of the claw, and bring out the hot water through the orifice of the root of the claw; and wait for the patient to feel a little burning from the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus you do to those and then proceed to the other until you overcome all the affected parts of their body.
And then heal those pus wounds because the roots of the claws are eradicated, and the flesh will be generated.
Chapter 3.
On the Cauterization of Tremors.
When you find a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to fever from a cold cause, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cautery with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and you cautery on their chest, and on their stomach, you cautery on the olive-shaped part.
And the tremor of theirs is restored and fixed with the healthiness of the affected coldness.
Chapter 4.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Wounds of the Body.
When the body is afflicted with accidental wounds, and it has pus-filled abscesses which are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore, at the beginning, it appears that it should be cauteryed over every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of long-lasting erestology; or with a slow-acting cautery.
And swollen veins are cauteryed at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and the excess is disrupted, making them healthy.
Maybe the emperor will then make it so that evacuation with phlebotomy is done properly.
Chapter 6.
On the Cauterization of Bloody Fluxes Caused by Incision of Arteries.
Swollen veins are found in fluxes of arteries that are cut by the wound which is made beforehand, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when you reach that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop there until the swollen veins are obstructed so that the fluxes of blood from the artery are stopped, and do not flow out.
And then stop at the fire with olive-shaped cauteries few and large, by name of many, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding the orifice so that you may retain it, and hold the cautery until it is bound and restored to that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you retain the orifice and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restored.
And beware that you do not injure the nerves which are here, and that another evil does not come upon the affected part.
And know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restore the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either cautery as I have said, or extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted, the extremities of my veins are injured and the blood is restored; or that it is tied with a faithful ligature or with a strong structure, or that they are stopped over the medicines from which the virtue is to restrain the blood; and they are strengthened in a pulvinar constriction.
Those who administer restrictions on the limb and strictures in the arm or by position of combustive causes and similarities, do not comfort but rather irritate.
Perhaps if you have endeavored to find the appropriate medicine, and there is no doctor present, then make a pause in the treatment indicated on the orifice of that vein, as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the blood is obstructed by the superior part of the plague, and concerning the artery it is not rejuvenated; and concerning the artery, it is aspurgated with much hot fluidity within which the blood is congealed and grossly swollen; and perhaps you should cauterize or use necessary medicine.
Of incision and perforation and fontanels and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cautery is convenient and combustive medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I will order the chapters according to the subordinate title of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be alleviated there, then on that which will have been demanded.
And then that I begin here, certainly, sons, who learn that in this chapter it is to be feared that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that which certainly is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made with blood from the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of sagitta or incision of stone and their similarities. And all those accompany fear and trembling and in their end, death.
And I warn you that concerning you, nothing falls in which is established, because some evacuations occur due to your manual skills of men, manual skills very prone to maladies. And of them it is certain that they flee from their malady and are far from death, and thus for the vehemence of that which finds its malady, and for the length of the malady of him, and in the malady is fear for that which means death.
And of those it is that which gives to your son to have and said, you hoping in that health, and the sixth malady is pernicious.
And therefore do not think that you consent to that which comes from the one who is this manual; and your caution should be greater than what you have considered and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about that unless certain science verifies it for you, and at which you perceive laudable success.
And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies of prognosis and indication of him who is converted health, because in that one you are helped above acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters according to what proceeds in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from the head to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you what you demand and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water retained in the head of infants.
You know that this malady many evacuations endeavour to infants from infancy and when the nurse strengthens the head of the infant with its livelihood.
And some evacuations endeavour for a hidden cause which is not known.
Perhaps you have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a saddened work in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified until it ceased not to be measured by the greatness of his head, and perhaps the humidity made the focus mortal.
And this humidity or is added between the codeina and the bone, or is added beneath the bone over the siphac.
Because the operation in that case the humidity is between the codeina and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is convenient that you make in the middle of the head a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatulum.
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the aposteme is larger, then there are two fissures here according to this manual.
And if the humidity is beneath the bone, it is signified by him that you empty the compartments of the head, full of all parts and the water is expressed when you comprehend that in the tie and at the internal parts and it is not what you hide. You find three cracks in the middle of the head according to this method:
And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the cracks with draps and plumassols; and then enclose above it on the sixth day, and then dissolve the lien and cure the plague with tentacles and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers how to bring out the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated areas are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the return of water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid fluent flows of blood and harm the patient with that flow of blood in evacuation of humidity.
Chapter following.
When there are many catarrhs or rheumas in the veins or at the feet, and it is an old thing, and it does not trust in that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And then you find when you want to incise those that the patient's vein is open, and then clean the area with a rough cloth to show the arteries, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a certain cloth; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places above the places which are close to the ears, and they occultate until some men.
And then sew over the artery with a thread, and incise some part of the partition wall above the incision made towards the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and separate it from the incisions above.
And it is the length of the incision two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with a pulsating outflow, which sometimes ceases before frequent.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three digits, and then sew with a thread, and finish towards the bone.
And it is that you stop the flow of blood which is a quantity of six ounces. and far from getting more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the return of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and if something remains on the bone because of the cifrax, then incise that so that an abscess does not form unnecessarily.
And then strengthen the plague with poultices and lien of cloth, and then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there are old or chronic catarrhs or rheumas, due to humidities and qualities in the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine and that does not trust, then we have proceeded in these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient's vein is open to the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is occultated until few men due to vehemence of friction.
And if it is occultated, then the neck of the patient is strengthened with some cloth; and then clean the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears to you manifestly. And then you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you score the cord in that which is facilitated until you reach the artery; and then get into the vein and extract it from the superior parts until you extract it from the cord and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of the entire part.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it at the extremity of the instrument, and incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and there will not be an outflow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not pour out all the blood.
And then evacuate six ounces of blood. within three (days).
And if the artery is large, then you find that you bind it in two places with a double strong cord or with cords at length, and do not touch the putrid matter within the consolidation of the plague and an outflow of blood.
And then remove the excess that is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or another time.
If you want, cauterize that spot with a pointed cautery entering the bone, so that the extremities are incised, and stand in place of that malleolus operation.
It is a better work if the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; because cautery is of those causes that help to finish the humor-related endings, and thus it is better in youthful age.
And then remove the accumulation of varices that fill the space of the outer joint, and place them decently on the pulses, and then cure with dry medicines that make the flesh and muscles enter so that it may be healthy.
And if meanwhile you observe another evacuation of blood from the varix, then you should restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the space of the joint, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then stop the finger on the spot so that the blood is congealed, and apply the spot with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and be strengthened according to what is fitting.
And that which is more suitable in the extraction of varices is that you cautery the vein with this cautery having two ends, since you have touched the two spots with tension, and pause sometimes, not much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two spots, so that it may be elongated what is between the extremities of the patient, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the sharpness of the two ends together. Perhaps it is better to have sharpness of two ends, because if you are agitated with two proper ends on each joint, and do not cut the flesh with velocity.
So when there is some thickness in those, it holds the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is more easily separated.
And this work is better in all works and more suitable.
And it is the space which is between two ends, the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the treatment of bodies of acute and acidic ulcers of the veins.
When the ulcers are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cape beforehand, and do not contribute in any way to the cause of medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient already inflates and feels on the sixth day of walking thus as if they were walking on formicas, and the veins of that one are exhausted, humidifying thus that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient wise men made efforts in the treatment of those from this operation, and no one mentions that treatment anywhere.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the skin which is on the sixth day of walking, and then incise in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the varices which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
And if you have a piece of spongy material prepared or dry cloths which absorb the blood.
And then introduce the spatula between two acute extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: which is from the partition of the temples until the second incision. Extract all that code which is between two incisions on the siphac which is above the bone, and then do it from the middle incision until the second incision. And then insert this spatula and enter into the first incision another instrument which is called a cutter, pointed on one side and not pointed on the other.
And stop the side of that pointed part near the flesh attached to the code, and the side of it inside the bone, and employ it until it reaches the middle fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the veins.
Perhaps it is continued the incision until it appears from the code, and then do it in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
And since the flow of blood is equal, express the spots of the pieces of congealed blood.
And then stop in each fissure a little bit of hot water, and stop above those pulses which are swollen with wine and oil and wine agrees, and beware that an abscess does not form without caution.
On the third day of treatment, administer a large infusion of warm water or tepid wine, and then take care to anoint with basilicon oil and rose oil, and other entreasures that the wounds may be healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of wounds caused by catarrh and descending ulcers from the divisions of the head.
When you have a case of catarrh that is acute and continuous, and the ulcers of the patient are extensive but small, and already the treatment of their eyes is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from their condition the skin is affected, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and consequent extrusion, then you know that this accident occurs because the catarrhal matter does not come from many veins of the divisions of the head proceeding.
And the best cure for this is: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that place at the middle of the forehead, a small one for its width (and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; and insert it into the bone; and stretch out your hand from the lacrimal ducts of the temples, which are blocked by mastification), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood that comes out with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the incision with a piece of veal or absorbent cloth. And then strengthen it from below with cotton pads wrapped in wax and oil, so that an aposteme does not develop.
And when you see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until new flesh begins to form, and then take care to cure with a regimen of desiccative powder which makes the flesh grow, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an emplaster and apply it to these wounds on the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of those that fall into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and veal, or it is from a plant thus as ciza or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus as water and wine agree and resemble it, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from hearing, and if it is peyra, then distill it with some violent oil or sizami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make a stormy draught with conditi, and open the nostrils for the advent of storming. And then stop the circulation of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the lower parts, because many times it is forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not healed, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a subtle gestatory epicicarian, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gesture, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of iron and insert the extremity of the canal into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil softened so that nothing except the canal enters. And then extract it from the tender vein with strong attraction, because many times it is reunited with water that we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of haluminate alum or of prepared aparelhat which are pressed with a small quantity of wings, and stop that at the extremity of the radius, and then envelop it decently over the cotton pad placed. And then insert that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then extract the ear from humidity.
And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will obtain a such denuding that an aposteme or spasm does not develop.
And the manner of denuding that is that you at the beginning cleanse the patient's vein of phlegmatic blood and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a circle between your hands and convert the ear to the lower parts, and make a small incision in the root of the ear from which the grey matter of it flows into the place previously prepared. And let the incision be of a lunar figure until it reaches the peyra, and, the peyra being removed, you can then use an appropriate instrument; and then close the incision at that hour with velocity, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if the cause that falls into the ear is one of the gross things that grow and swell, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own assent, then take a subtle spatula according to this form: And administer there the absorption of that grade which has fallen into the aurelia.
And do not think that it has been humidified by the vapors of the aurelia, and stop it in many places, and try to extract them with the hooks or subtle gestures, or as if inscribing thus, because the extraction is alleviated.
Perhaps in the water that has entered the aurelia, because the patient uses sternutation with a conditioned commencement, and fills the entire aurelia with much violence, and throws above that aureilia in which is the water, and if it is forgotten, be it; and otherwise, take three or four towels and place them according to the length of the digit, and warm them in the focus of fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of their aurelia and rises above one side of that part and percusses with another towel above the towel that is touching the aureilia. So cease to throw water onto the stone until all the water has been forgotten.
So cease to throw water onto the stone until all the water has been forgotten. And now the water will be forgotten, and you will take paper or cotton. And place one extremity of it in the aurelia and extend the other extremity into the fire until it is well-burned.
And also place another cotton and make it as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw that with a cannula thus as it is said of the extra-drawing stone.
Perhaps in the extraction of beast entering into that aurelia, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its semblance, cure it thus as we have said in the division; perhaps if it is of great size which causes appearance at the sign of the vein, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and hooks, and the cause of it is put less serious than all the other causes that happen in the aurelia.
Perhaps in the extraction of worm engendered in the aurelia, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confide your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the aurelia to sunlight.
And then if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle hooks, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula strongly stretched and drawn out from which this is the form of it. And insert the subtle extremity into the aurelia according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck strongly with water, making many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
Perhaps if you do not obey your assent, then plug and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax thus as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
And it is your effusion which you pour out the medicinal oils into the aurelia with this instrument of which this is the form. And make it of silver or copper, strongly stretched, in which there is a small hole, and flat on the bottom.
And then it is as they fill up to what is in the cavity of the cannula, containing here what will be necessary. And if you wish, take the radix and envelop it decently in the extremity of the container, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the aurelia —, and then insert the radix with warmth below and express your hand to compress temporarily until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
And what has been poured into the aurelia has already been scaled in fire a little. And beware that the cause which you distilled into the aurelia is not too frequent, because the medicines of aurelia do not suffer that.
Chapter 7.
On the cure of obstruction of aurelias.
Some turns some enfantise yes of the veins of those greater non-perforated, and it has already happened in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the aurelia due to plague or due to nothing in that; and this obstruction some turns is made in the press of the aurelia's vein which does not constrict the vein, and some turns are in the partitions beforehand.
And that which happens in the press of it, which does not comprehend the vein, is in the major dispositions of difficult sanitation.
And in that which you obtain the vein, it is necessary that you expose the aurelia of the patient to sunlight and regard it in that. And then if apparent obstruction occurs, open it with a subtle spatulum of which this is the form.
If the extremity of it is in which there is a small latitude, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatulum is of two equal lengths so that it does not make a lesion on the aurelia.
And then if the opilation is born from flesh in the auricle or in the meat of it, then you have that subtle and vehement facilitating instrument which enters to be stopped entirely by all the flesh.
And if the opilation is in the pronation of the auricle, then take subtle lion's ray and scalp that focus on a few points, and then place it in the meat of the auricle.
And then if you have felt the opulation in that which the patient has facilitated, by the gravity of listening, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that it does not plague the nerves of the auricle.
And then pause on the auricle, draining according to the quantity of the ample of the trauc which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and make it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a jug and sprinkle it over the affected area and use it to treat; and if the auricle has already been infected, then cover so that you extract the water and mix it with another water which you have enveloped in cerate, until it is well-roasted, so that the apostema is cautiously cured; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Perhaps it happens that blood flows, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause over the auricle, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
About the cure of athetosis which affects the eyelids.
Athetosis that affects the eyelids of the eyes, some affected areas are humid, some affected areas are dry.
Then it is necessary that you hold those with tenacious or onion-like ( formations), and examine those that are spat out by their roots, and then pause over the affected areas.
Perhaps if pain comes with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those that are pointed cauteries in a subtle and circular manner.
And the best cauterization is to burn the affected areas and dry them out, returning when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Humid matters accumulate in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled into cataract in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called cataract.
And it is an addition of gross humidity below the eyelid and above.
Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the cataract is proceeding from it in that which appears on the eyelid and is magnified to the entire part; and the cause of it is lachrymose.
Then make a cut above it with a latitudinous incision, and then excavate the entire affected part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with an onion-like formation and abscess it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the internal surface, then you remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract with an onion-like formation, unless you indicate the incision, and press it on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that does not hurt in any cause.
And then make the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and cure the area with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of abscesses in the eyelid below the eye.
Abscesses are grey matters which are engendered in the tunics of the eyelid below, and they especially affect children, aggravating the eyes of those and accelerating their catarrhal mucus; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sun's light because of that which gathers and coagulates in them.
And thus you often see those eyes staring at them for a long time, and upon those eyes sleeping; and so on the eyelids of their lowers, the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent acceleration is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acceleration until it reaches them.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his/her head on the finger thus, and then pause a cloth of the same and of the same warmth, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains arthritic matter from the entire part, and then pause it upon it and press with fingers of the entire hand so that acceleration is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a spatula through a latitudinous fissure, and the fissure should not be larger than the fissure made in flaubotomia.
More often in the cavity of the belly that you find the entire code inside until you reach the upper part, because more often in the aforementioned processes the upper part is reached through a fissure according to the form of white grey matter.
Then extract that matter which you have enveloped between the fingers of both hands on the affected parts beforehand and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the vein and descends to that matter.
If it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, rather adjust in the fissure a small facilitated matter until it processes the upper part; and then extract that matter which we have said; and then submerge the drips of it in water and wine and place them over the area and strengthen those empty pouches.
And thus you will find that they draw salt and pause it in the cavity of the fissure so that what is left of that humidity remains.
And then heal it until it is healthy.
If an abscess forms in the affected area, then heal that matter with applied cedar plasters until it is healthy.
Chapter 11.
On the manner of touching the vein.
When in the eyelids of the veins there are born unnatural and ancient adjustments, then those nose on the vein and make manifold evil humors, thus with assiduous tears and mollification of eyelids and web until it is cause of destruction of the vein which is called touching the vein, and it is cured in four manners: either by cautery fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries; or it is made tangible by incision and suture; or by canes as you have heard.
And thus you should pause the head of the patient in your hand; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, well; and if not, insert a needle in that place where the faith of the affected part is below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from above, and that should be — next to the edge of the eyelid where the unnatural adjustments are — next to the adjustments, and pull the faith to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
And then make a hole in the affected part within the eyelid below the unnatural adjustments with a spatula incident to the larger lacrimal and up to the smaller one; and then extract the faith and pause below the eyelid small pouches of cotton or cloth, and then apply a dressing over the eyelid in the shape of a fig leaf.
More often it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because already it has been diversified in men, since those are the ones who indicate that it should be incised from the large eyelid a great quantity according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then make with the spatula on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one. And if your fissure is next to the natural adjustments thus like the largest vein of the king.
And then place the ongu (onion) in one of the two angles of the code (body), and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with the scythe the two labia around the throat or faith of subtle wool, and abstergify the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the faiths over the two eyebrows for some envisioning causes, if you want to do it, and otherwise, do not cure.
And then loosen the suture of the faiths within three days or four, and then heal that.
And if you want, loosen the plague's suture, and heal that with what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the plague and its aggregation; more sutures are better. Therefore, thus I have discussed the antiquities of taxanir.
More often it is solicited about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you place on the eyelid a fig leaf shape, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and conjoined inches according to this form:
More often if it is not possible to have the inches, and it is not engulfed, then take a needle in which there is a thread and place it in the middle of the fig leaf shape, and insert the other faith next to the larger lacrimal, and the faith according to the smaller one, and adjust between your fingers the faiths equally, and then elevate your hand with elevated engulfment, elevate the entire code above what is marked thus as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two labia of the plague with suture, and heal that until it is healthy.
More often if an abscess forms from your incision or your fissure, but that abscess is with wax and has a similar appearance, and is congealed.
Some remedies are applied to the eyelid which converts the eyes' vision, therefore you should use those that we have said concerning insertion; but sometimes the suture is more artificial.
To remove the canker, follow this method: and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then by skillful art make two canker or two subtle stitches of those whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their being smaller than the width of the spatium. And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add some subtle subtlety under what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the eye, and construct the canker of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and thus for some hours, because the cord will be strengthened by the morbid structure and will be denied and will slowly enter until it will be seen to fall.
But if it is delayed, then cut the vein with the torches, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
So when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the eyes do not pain.
And this is the method of making two cankers which you will do according to this form: and observe the quantity of the length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
About the elevation of painful eyes in the eye with a pointed needle when the eye is hard.
When the eyes are unnatural, hard and rough, and painful, then the operation on them is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that subtle vein of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in many ways. And it is the length of the veins of a quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle vein below it in brief, and numb the extremities of that if you want to.
And then stop the bad blood that comes from the corrupt head, and it will be proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted eye which has need of ingenium, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract what is beneath the natural eye.
And then pull out the eye from beneath and introduce it into the socket, and thus the eyes will be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand from that until the eye is restored to its socket in the eyelid with the natural eye.
But if it is stuck in the socket and the eye does not go in, you will stick the socket to the parts below with the vein which you have composed there, until it is stuck in the socket above the transparent tube.
And look at that with the vision of the eye, because then you will stick the socket and the vein, and you will grasp something and close the eye, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the eye adheres to its own place and is born again on good flesh.
And if the eye is shorter, then you adjust a long eye of natural eyes, and it is elevated there, or until it is lengthened, and then you elevate it.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of extracting what is seen in the eyelid beneath.
When it is seen in the eye to extract, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted on itself, either to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, and it is called leporina, and this extraction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, or for similarity to their evil humors.
There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where it is between those a mixture of drap of lie, and tie them until they are healed.
And do not think that you use the cure of it from the causes which dry up, constraining; because if you do that, it returns to extraction worse than never having had it.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugrec, and immerse it in the water in which there are cooked altaea and essence of lie, or ingenious dyaquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge it in that mixture, and cure it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perfect it in every ingenious way that is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of extraction that does not return the form of the place according to what was before.
Chapter 14.
About the treatment of hernia which is made in the eyelid above.
This hernia which is made in the eyelid above, which is normally called hernia; and it is of a certain natural kind, or an accidental one.
Sometimes accidental ones are made by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle and make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into the spatium in abundance. And thus if the figure of the eyelid returns to its covering, it is; and if not, take the thread and pass it through the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two fissures in the side of the eyelid above.
And the extremities of the two fissures make two angles of the incision, which are made so that they converge, and it is of their made angle so that when they gather together, they form a figure.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the width of the instrument below it, so that you see the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
And if the hernia is opened by a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been said before. And then separate them with a poultice between two lips, as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the treatment of hernia when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of hernia, and that is in various forms of moles.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in such a way that it is possible to return the figure to its natural form, or near to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs to many times so that the eyelid is solidly stuck above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it with the nail.
And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatium, which is not sharp enough to make incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and remain with the spatium that does not lead the eye to its sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it excises that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and place on the eye a woolen cloth infused with album of egg, and then use it for three days as causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
About the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh on the lacrimal glands.
You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and it is similar to a subtle dry cipher; or it is non-nervous, similar to a white humid congealed humidity, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on the nail, it is absorbed and the nail does not fix in it.
And both species do not begin except from the major lacrimal gland until it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
Sometimes the manner of operating in the incision of it is that the malady places its dry cap in the tie, and then operates on the eyes of it, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the nail from the nail bed with little duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into a hair of horse or ox or of a cow, or of similar things, or of strong faith, or duplicate the extremity of the small needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with strong faith; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excise the hair from the width of the nail which is seen in the pupil. And thus you will follow that bone from the back of their spine.
And then you will insert the rhizome into the radix of the lacrimal, with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal heal so that by inserting it there, it does not produce continuous fluxes of tears.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's claw spatula, of which this is the form.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then insert a small amount of triturated salt or crushed egg whites into the wound, and let it stay there for another day; and then take care that the water that covers the wound is clean so that it may be sanctified.
And if the nail is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that sole, then many times this type of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus, as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to cut that out, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion's claw spatula, sharpened with an acute edge according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and condensed and enters into that radix, then distill from your work in the wound of crushed egg whites or of clear rog or of triturated salt, and apply the wound for another day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is of it is removed, but beware lest a contrary abscess be in the wound, for then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to heal the abscess so that it may be sanctified.
And then repeat your operation on that root until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if you find it in the wound for great annoyance, should be suspended on the sole; and insert that from that one part, and do not ultimately insert it so that it does not produce fluxes of tears.
And then distill in the lacrimal clear rog and crushed egg whites until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the insertion of alum and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Sometimes in the wounds of some eyes is born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to close together before and is assembled like a rose of balaustra.
The operation in this case is that the patient pauses his own head on his knee; and then open the wounds of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient onions to that, and take it with a forceps or with a chest; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that you do not leave that which deviates from your operation.
And it is your insertion with which you insert those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the insertion of the nail, or with small forceps with which you will collect according to what you will find in the form of this chapter.
When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with triturated salt, or distill into the powder of clear rog and similar to those of corrosive medications, and place over the wound before putting on an album of skin until it is assured against abscess.
And if some cause of alum and it is Lord-saved from abscess, and fears abscess, then leave the wound and take care of that abscess with water that falls on that abscess, and repeat the operation until it is healed, and similarly make flesh adjusted which adheres in the wound of this species.
Many times you will find that nature cures the wound by natural way or by accidental way, opening with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabur comes with clear rog which is tested on the wound and prohibits its vesiculation, and it develops the wound in longitude of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other malady except sabur, then you collect that sabur.
And it is that you command the patient to pause his own head on his knee, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form.
or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstain from the holy hour to hour, until you see those veins being removed from the wound and being revolved.
Take heed that you do not lead the veins in the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is during the morning before the sun rises, and be very firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
When you have completed it, then distill in the chief vein either green or red for that which is acutely corroded, so that which remains of the sap.
Perhaps it is not possible to collect all of that at that hour, and then you apply a plaster to all that which stops the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against apostemeous abscess.
And then iterate over it according to the method that the doctor will manage until it is healthy.
And this is the form of the fractures:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of aristocratic nose injuries.
When you treat aristocratic nose injuries with a cautery or sharp medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healthy, then it is not engendered in it except that you make an incision over the aposteme until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and in the pus until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and sometimes it is rotten or black, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called an asphalt cup, and it is made of iron from India, and it is a redonating cap thus as you sharpen the point for puncturing with lime or alkali for subtle puncturing (thus as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corrupted bone location, and then revolve it among the fingers of your hand, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is removed.
And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the location with causes of desiccative and styptic remedies.
Then if the location is consolidated and it is in good newborn flesh and is absolved from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematized and does not occur in the accident, then you know that it is healthy.
And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this method: and it is that you discover from second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribulations according to this form:
It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and the trust of it is primarily extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then pause that over the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little into the vein, and then revolve your hand with the tribulation until it penetrates all of the bone, and that senses the patient for so long as to attract the vent and issue per so when you hold their hand.
Then restore the location with styptic medicines that desiccate thus as you are experienced in it.
Then since the flesh and location are indurated, then the matter that was scattered to the distant parts returns to the nose, so it is possible to lighten the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the vein.
When the vein emerges in its entirety and does not occur in the nocturnal diminution or decrease, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient, and then to follow, and then to pause ventoses on the cervical scars with good suction; and then to pause over the vein with a liniment made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then to strengthen the emplaster over the vein with many powders.
And the method of the powders is that you take drapes of the lion's powder, and each drape is duplicated in four places; and make from those powders.
And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the vein has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the ventoses with good suction on their scars; and then remove the ventoses and leave the vein straight for a day and a night.
Perhaps meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very straight.
And then remove the ligament for a day and a night thus as we have said.
And if sometimes the vein is not reduced, well, and otherwise, then iterate the emplaster with powders and structure and ventoses until it is healthy.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
When there is disruption in the tunicate vein, and then it is eminent and proceeds outward through the eyelids thus as a grain of radish, and its form is shaped like a home for that, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the vein from below, and then put another needle in the double filament part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double filament and lift it up with that part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that much.
And then extract the needle and place it on the affected vein, where the fluid has accumulated in a sac, and let the bad blood flow out through the tube.
And then treat the vein with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
Some remedies are added to the entire affected area in a circle of cloth around the vein, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that draws out the purulent humor, and dries the albugeous moisture, and cleans the vein and inserts it so gently.
And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This illness that is called an ulcer is not but a sore that is adjusted to the vein, resembling descending water and it is not that.
The method of operating on it is to make the ulcer sit above the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mauve until you see the sore pervading to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and the light is held back, and the ulcer sees the causes thus, as it was accustomed.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent to the sore with water that we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and pierce it above the panniculus, encircling a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the cornea (in the place you will see), so that the sore is forgotten.
Since it is forgotten, then you distill on the vein with hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it is treated for other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 22. (again)
On the treatment of descending water from the vein.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with a declaration-making serum, then secondly according to the sanity.
Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands above a copper plate and bind the vein with a strong ligature.
And then pause near the eyelid of your left vein, if the vein in which is the water is the left vein; or with your right hand, if the vein is on the right.
And then take with your right hand the almond-shaped [instrument], if the vein is on the left; or with your left hand, if the vein is on the right.
And then pause the extremity of the almond-shaped [instrument] near the crown for the greatness of the radius in the album of the vein on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then insert the almond-shaped [instrument] in virtue and revolve your hand in that.
And then penetrate into the album of the vein and feel that the almond-shaped [instrument] has already reached the cause, which is seen.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the almond-shaped [instrument] be taken at the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the vein; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the vein through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause the almond-shaped [instrument] in the place where the water is, and then you will draw it down a little way, and thus if the water descends quickly, then you will see the ulcer that was above, where the vein had its sight quickly, and the almond-shaped [instrument] in the vein.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you pause that other way before the almond-shaped [instrument] is touched.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond-shaped [instrument] with facility, and revolve it a little with your hand, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and in that flow the vein is cleaned; and then pause for the vein to be stopped or lanated or infused with oil rosat and album of huou and ligua on that vein.
But we, who are from our time, pause over that same path which is written in the album of Huou.
And if you do not obey your almond-shaped [instrument] to the instrument of the vein for its hardness — because it is a virtue of the men whose vein is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is named Alberid, from which this is the form:.
And then pierce in that conjunction, and do not ultimately put your hand in the trajectory, and it is not so that you make a way to the subtle place of the almond-shaped [instrument].
And then insert the almond-shaped [instrument] according to what we have said.
And give completion to your work, the ulcer is prepared dormant descending into the place where it sleeps above the two veins in a dark mansion, and it is prohibited from all movements.
It pauses in the nature of that water so that it may be cleaned its own nature, and does not let the bad blood flow to the right or left side of the whole.
It is the ligament according to its disposition within the third day.
And then detach it from that dark and troubled place, and show the clear view, and make the veins visible for some causes, and then return the ligament within the seventh day.
And do not cover that it makes water in the hour of the cures or almost then return to the infusion. You have covered that you remove water for thus the water flows more lightly and with great and violent regard.
Sometimes an abscess is caused by heat, then cover that you detach the vein from within the seventh day, and correct that water which falls from the abscess.
Then you absolve the sight of it and pause on the face of its orifice for which the governance of its evacuation is regulated through some days, it exists in the dark and troubled place.
And then it is extracted from that dark place gradually and converted into its causes.
And you know that in the mixture it is not excused to omit some seen things, and then you are skilled about the operation.
And now it has come to us from some of those which are at the Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayraque magnet, perforating with which the water is succeeded.
Perhaps Emperor, you have not seen it yet in our land which has perfected water, nor is it written in some of the ancient books of the ancients; and it is possible that this water is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magnetism for which they are above those, that which ignores them:
And they are made of iron or of proper iron, and they are the extremities of their own in this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse adjusted flesh growths from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many feet, or to a poly pus; and this badness is called polyp because it resembles that foot represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, lumpy, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion-colored flesh.
Therefore in that which is in these lion-colored flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the badness seize between your hands and place it under the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and prick the tender spot once in that flesh. And then extract it from the divided parts beforehand, and then inject water that has comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part into which you know that all the flesh is already evacuated; that if it remains of it without any cause for which the abscession is possible, then you ratify with water among the subtle instruments facilitated in order to remove any cause. Perhaps it is lordship of saint or abscess heat, then you pause at the water that covers; or it is of the malignant apostems, then you touch and cauterize it within so that it is absolved saint and all the cavities are evacuated.
And then it is poured into the nose, then inject through the vein agreeable water or wine. Perhaps the nose is open and of it processes humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate according to what covers, then you know that it is not flesh in the pus-filled bones of the nostrils, which have not been abscessed.
Therefore then cover that you put in the faith of the one which is some grossness, and anoint with the foot anointed, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or month, and engender the badness and put in one extremity of the faith in the nostrils at the royal ointment or at another cause which is possible.
And then it will be done, that it attracts the sweet odorament into which it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and it is established over the sweet golayro, because many seen things resemble this action, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the faith, one extremity that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer serrature of flesh among the nuts which are in the faith, and make it enter until you know that the flesh is already among the nuts of the faith.
And then extract the faith, and pause in the nose according to the abstraction of a saint's water, and make it for three days or more until all that is rotten flesh is corroded.
And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
More things are in need of cure that exist, one from that.
And this is the shape of the instrument to prepare the concoction, in which distilled oils and medicines are poured into the nostrils.
And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lantern turned upside down, thus with a small container, and the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed canal like a pipe, and the canal of the instrument to prepare the concoction is flat, uncovered; at which handle is in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to draw out of the oil or what you want of the succulent juices.
Chapter 25.
Of the evil humors in the extremities of the nose.
Evil humors are purged from the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned in several days within which the remedy is readied for him.
And through that cave you inject it at the beginning of his appearance, and eradicate all of it. Then stop over the area with a cautery or burning medicine which is applied to the affected area of him.
If the infection is delayed within which it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that iron quar which is an aposteme of cancerous quar; because evil humors are purged from that which infects with great malice over that which he had.
And if the aposteme is of a gentle touch and not of dark color, and it seems that the infection is possible in all of that, then evacuate the evil humors and inject those without fear, and cure the area with what exists and constrain within which it is healthy.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
You know that when you restore continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer with that operation unless in some homes.
Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with healthy blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitching, and afterwards cure that within which it is healthy.
And if the lips of continuity solution are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract a part of its apparent code within which it does not become unhealthy. And then adjust the two lips to stitching and strengthen those, and upon those sprinkle healthy dragon's blood powder and triple-refined, and place over the powder a piece of definitive plaster or some other of the consolidating plasters, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove that and change the plaster and let it lie until the wounds are fully closed, and then cure with an ointment within which it is healthy.
The manner of stitching is that you add the continuity solution or with threads like we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the continuity solution with a thread as I and you know how to do it.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Evil humors are purged from many homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes are hard and similar to fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you convert the lips and remove each of those hardnesses from every part, and then the abscess is filled with triple-refined balm within which the blood is restored, and then it is washed with a gentle wine and the area is cured with what is stipulated, within which it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
About the infection of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Many evil humors are poured over the adjusted flesh of the gum which the ancient physicians call albucles, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with onion or that you hold that with forceps and inject that into the roots, and let the healthy blood flow or the healthy blood.
And then stop over the area with triple-refined balm or other stipulated or excitative powders.
And if that flesh returns, then inject it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the root of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the divided parts of the mouth and of the forehead and between the well-adjusted gums, there are blackened and decayed spots, and some veins are varicose or greenish in color, indicating that the gum is corrupt and the teeth are loose.
And so it is necessary to separate the patient between your hands and place their head on a pillow, and extract the teeth from those which appear to be decayed and causing similar symptoms, so that none of them remain, and this is done because of the blackness and citrinity and other mondified things.
Then it is established that this is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you will iterate the reasoning over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth have needed various roots and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason the roots of the teeth are those which are rooted in the divided parts of the mouth and another type of root is that which is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots must be prepared as you will see soon.
Chapter xxx.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain entirely and slowly in the entire extraction of it, because there is no cause that surpasses the void left when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance within which the excuse lies in the extraction of it.
Moreover, it is necessary that when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you must firmly be certain which tooth hurts, because many voids alleviate the pain and convince the patient that they are in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and hurting tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how do you certify which tooth hurts, and what do you know, then it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the entire gum, and then you take out that one with gentle forceps or subtle subtile forces at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
And then you take hold of it with strong forceps for good loquacity or sturdy extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your knees so that you have them in a position where they cannot move, and then you extract the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not torment, nor does the patient experience major pain.
And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of that traction and strengthen it at the extremity of a subtle root so that it is not trapped during the time of your construction over that one with forceps.
And it is necessary that you operate with exactness in the scraping of the entire part of the gum and guard much your strength so that you do not torment it and remove a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what the ignorant and foolish barbers do in their obstinacy and audacity over the eradication of them, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many voids come about on the badly treated large wounds which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of them remain all or some of those, or that you extract them with certain osses from the mandible, just as many voids have testified.
And then the eradication of it is washed out of the mouth with warm water or agreeable salt.
And if it flows with blood for a while, just as many voids flow, then sprinkle some quantity of powder and asperties on the wound, and if that powder does not congeal, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and gentle forceps which are used to extract the tooth from the beginning is of long extremity, of short handle and large, so that they are not doubled when you need to operate with them.
And they are also like times of large handle until when you stretch them, they are not doubled, but brief extremities.
And they are made of Indian iron, decently made with straight extremities, and in the extremities of those there are teeth which some enter into others and stretch for strong construction, and some voids the extremities of those are in the form of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter xxxi.
On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from the Truncated Mandibles.
When you need to remove teeth that are held in place by roots, then cover the area around the tooth for a day or two days until it becomes numb; and then insert the instruments or forceps between the extractions of which they are assembled at the beak of a special pincers called forceps.
The extractions of their roots are to be made gently with lime or alum, thus.
And if they do not obey your pressure with these forceps or instruments, then you should make an incision on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument that has the name of elevator, which is a small lever whose form is this.
And let it be a short, thick extremity, and not be bent back so that it is not held in place.
Then if the root is forcibly removed, well; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two slants of which this is the form, suitable for the following. and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because you will find it made with this instrument which is assembled at an iron handle, and this is the form.
of the triangular extremity curved or short, which has some thickness, and not bent back so that it is not held in place.
And you will know that the instruments for extracting teeth move similarly and are similar to the other instruments.
The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the material according to what it signifies for the operation and various diseases; because they are among the diseases that the ancients did not distinguish or pause to create proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
But if it is held in the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if they are porous, then be careful about that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with a gesture of which this is the form.
And let it be with some small thickness little by little, and let it be tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is fully formed; and then restore the area with medicines conveniently adapted to that.
But if there is small porosity in the bone, then scrape that porosity and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, it is ugly, and especially in women, and especially in venerable old people; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or smooth it, then root out that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you insert it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a boar's mouth, and it should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
And let your insertion be in which you insert it with three days' duration for the durability of the tooth, and that it not be joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to lime, then lime it with lime of Indian iron of which this is the form.
And let it be all of Indian iron and the margin is well-shaped; and let it be of many small points thus like lime in which they are made agitated, in which the tooth is limed little by little in many days with facility, so that it is not another tooth joined and attached. And then bind it together in the faith, and scrape it with the razor's edge.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is held and the tongue is freed, then you should lime it until the aspiration of that fraction is stopped and encased, and let it be applied so that the tongue does not lead astray nor the speech corrupt.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with foil of gold or silver.
When it happens to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot strengthen above what they can manage, and you have treated that with medicines which are topical, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that it does not decay into those which are strengthened with foil of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes greenish and soon wears away in a few days, but gold at no time loses its value.
And let the foil be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosities of the foil between two decayed teeth, or one or many, until it reaches the web to the healthy tooth of the other part. And then you should insert the treatment into the affected part from which it began, and strengthen your hand to facilitate and expedite insertion so that it is not painful.
And let your grip be the one that strengthens the fibers of the veins that do not allow the bad blood to escape.
And then you should excise the superfluous fibers of the vein with forceps or scissors, and add those to any place where they are gathered, and convert them into occult [or hidden] ones between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth, so that it does not cause lesions on the tongue. And then you should release that thus straying with Roman [method or treatment].
Maybe it is dislocated or ruptured, strengthen that or those in another vein in such a manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and of two bad ones, thus as it happens to these being bound together.
And when it happens that one tooth or two are about to fall out, then you should re-implant them in their places, and be careful thus as we have recounted, so that they remain.
And do not do it unless you are skilled artisans and know how.
And some worn-out ones are suitable for a cause of the cow's bones, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which is beneath the tongue sometimes grows naturally in which a man is born, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, the entire existing head being in the correct position; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude within so that the tongue is freed from its confinement.
Maybe in it there is some hardness or knot, and that has been established by consolidation of a wound, then you inject oil and divide it along the latitude within so that you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you do not cut an artery and vein, so that there is a flow of blood.
And then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or with wine or with cold water; and then pause beneath the tongue, thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue in any night so that it does not consolidate another wound.
Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood, stop on the spot where the bleeding is triple; maybe if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is suitable for this. And then heal it in the other causes within so that it is healthy.
Chapter 35.
About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an abscess forms, resembling a small swelling, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnified within so that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise it from the entire affected part; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you stop three fingers above, so it is triple, within so that the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work within so that you have treated it with the complement of it, within so that it is washed with wine and salt; and heal it with another healing suitable for this within so that it is healthy.
Chapter 36.
About the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of other abscesses.
When they occur in the gullet, thus they are glands which are assembled together, which occur before and are named two auricles, which when you treat them with that which we have said in the division and it is not healthy, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that which is iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that which is iron for the flow of blood; unless you let it mature within so that it is ripe, and then you can remove it, or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, radiant, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
And the operation to be considered, in your operation, if you have already restored the apostema of the cautery completely or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit up straight, and the head of the patient should be high, and open their mouth, and the servant takes hold between their hands before the tongue, with an instrument most noble whose form this is.
It is made of silver or copper, and it is subtle like a knife.
Then as you press upon the tongue and it shows you the apostema, and you see above that the head is veiled, then take hold of it with your finger and place it in the amenla, and pull it towards the parted places as far as you can. Another thing that pulls out some cause from the tunics, and then cut open with an instrument of which this is the form.
Another thing that pulls out some cause from the tunics, and then cut open with an instrument of which this is the form. and it is assembled like forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the inner part of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed in a bend.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut open with a spatulum of which this is the form of it: It has a point on one side, not a point on the other side.
And after you have cut open a mole, cut open the other according to this same method of cutting, and then make the incision in the patient's groin area with water frequently.
But if there is a flow of blood, make frequent use of water of decoction of roots of milfoil or of leaves of myrtle and similarly to those of the stipating causes so that the flow of blood may be restrained, and then take care of it until it is healed.
And some veins are found in the gut and other apostemas besides those two auricles, and cut open those according to what you have said and done in the incision of two moles similarly.
And you had medicated a woman with an apostema which was born in her gut, the apostema which tended to a dark color, of little sensation, which had almost closed her gut, and the woman breathed with great strain, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was near death if more aid had not been given for a day or two.
And the apostema had so grown that it had made two ramps inside, so that it would burst through two tracts.
Then you carefully examine with your fingers and find it in one of their corners, and pull it out, and the hernia is from his great portion, and then you cut open that corner to comprehend the other tract, and then you open their mouth, and comprehend their tongue, and then you place your finger on the corner in that apostema.
And then you remove a great part of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood. Then the gut of that woman was absolutely free, and she began to drink water, and then took solid food, so you did not cease to cut into that apostema many times per long time, and the apostema succeeded in place of that, which was prolonged until it was.
Then you began to cauterize their gut, and thus ended the addition; and then you walked around and did not know that God made that miracle for me.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a hernia when it is apostematous.
When the hernia descends to the groin, and it is apostematous and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the fatty and round part, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not match, and sometimes it happens that the apostema was removed from it and is subtle, then it is necessary to cut open that which has become round; and if it is at that length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its natural sentiment, then it is necessary to make an incision on it, because there is fear about the patient.
And when you sometimes do it according to the method that you have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit up straight and press their tongue with an instrument of which process is its form and then place your finger on the corner in the new one, and pull it out downwards and cut open it with one of the two instruments which were said in the incision of two moles.
And it is necessary that you do not cut open it unless what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you cut into it more, you will destroy the whole speech.
And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two moles, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then use beginning in the cauterization of it with fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient up straight, and then press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take hold of the water which we have spoken about in the chapter on cauterization, and make it a living cause, and do not stop until it is subtle, and from it fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form.
The external application of the conquavitat where medicine is placed, thus with the conquavitat of a ray's tail, and place the instrument in the medicine over the valve, and let the patient's saliva or mucus from their mouth be directed towards the internal medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat of the patient and that they do not experience discomfort from that cause.
And then place your hand in the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be digested and settled by the absorption of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray into the cloth in a canal above so that the cloth adheres to it, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize by inserting a cloth wrapped in a border, and modify that which is in the circuit of the vein with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand with an embrocation, and eliminate any bitterness until it is healthy.
And this species of cure is more salvaging than incision and longer in terms of fear.
Some wounded eyes are cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because they are cured with subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in vinegar for two weeks, and boil; and the bowl should be well-luted, decently, and placed in the middle of the bowl a tube, on which is placed an instrument conquered by silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is moderately suffused.
And then iterate over those wounded matters until it is dry, and be careful that you do not make this cure at the time of the advent of abscesses, because it would adjust too much in the abscess, and do not think that you are doing it, but rather declare the abscess of the patient's wound.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the wound in a closed space, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed space of the cane prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of spines and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Wounded matters adhering to the throat or spine of feet or some other cause.
Then you will know that you extract what is apparent, on which the gaze falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument under the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you will know that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forced out by vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or radish or lettuce or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and tie it firmly with thread, and then transpose the patient so that it passes through the place where the spines are extracted, and then it will be forced out. And take an eel and bind it with thread, and let it be in the place where the spines are extracted, and then it will be eliminated; or take a porcupine and eliminate the spines and eliminate them from the entrails.
But if you do not force out the spines in those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
And it is because the bulk is greater than a small one, and in the extremity of the wound there is a conquavitat which you insert into its throat with ease.
And the old man's head is elevated on his back, and be careful that the touch of the old bone in the throat, so that it does not fall on the body and in that which pierces the bone or spine, or that it meets with his hand.
But I think that the patient who inserts it is skilled, because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and he pierces in himself, and draws his hand with the instrument above, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forced out.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood congealed annexed to the throat.
When blood is medicated in a way that we have described in the division of cures and medicines, do not contradict, considering then the gout of the patient at sunrise, since you have comprehended the language with an instrument which you have recommended.
Then if you weaken the blood, extract that which is in a small vein or subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a burning iron in the cavity of the cannula, and make it stay there as long as needed (until the bad blood is dead and comes out of the gout) and abstain from giving the patient any water for a whole day.
And then take a full vessel of cold water, and hold the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this water for an hour, then give them another on their hand, because the bad blood is then just as sensitive to the cold water.
However if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cymes or asafoetida through the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and it will be in four days.
And there is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is to take a vessel in which are burning coals and the vessel is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and then give below the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has penetrated to the bad blood, because the bad blood is then just as clear.
And if it does not clear, then repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient any drink, and eat salty foods and meats, and do not ask for water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen is not forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the bad blood of the gout is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it has some curvature:. Which is placed on the gout, and its end is similar to a beak of a cicnia, which holds, in which is applied a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not leave.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of theirs, from each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs for two manners, from which one is for the species of abscesses in their metrics; and for that which you comprehend of the humidities.
And the second manner is proper for the locations in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess on the head is different from an abscess on the back; and an abscess in a fleshy location occurs differently from an abscess in a joint; and each one of theirs has its judgment for operation.
And many abscesses are such that they do not need to be perforated but rather mature resolution of the sania in those or fulfillment of theirs.
Other abscesses are such that they need to be drained when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are put near joints, because an abscess when it reaches a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it becomes mature, it will not reach the principal member; or it is near the back, therefore perforate what has not matured; and do not need to perforate crudely, from incomplete digestion, but only that which is near the back, so that you do not corrupt its process and it becomes elongated in the parts of the back, and makes a fistula, or it happens at the end of it that it does not heal. Many know when to perform the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is matured.
And you know that it is matured when there is reduction of the pain and cessation of the fever, and decrease of the rigidity and of the pulse, and the acute state of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And because you know that you should perform the perforation cautiously in the place just below the abscess and of the pus coming out of the cure of the eminence.
And perforation is sometimes for the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the muscles or of the feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay perforation until digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you perforate at that time, it prolongs the body of the patient's pain and makes the labia more indurated and profound.
Many abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body which needs it, or according to the quality of the member that is injured.
And it is good to administer small perforations, and in large abscesses a large and ample or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are of the abscesses in which it is good that the codena (tumor or swelling) be conquered and encircled, when it is done thus and it is done in term that it is already established, thus as those that accumulate in tropics of dubllec and of bubos.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as the figure of a sword's leaf, thus as the abscesses of the angles.
And of theirs that are administered round sections and lunar sections, and similar to those.
Many of those that are not able thus as their abscesses are superficial, it is good that you perforate with a superficial perforation, or a plain one only.
And it is good when the abscess is large and has collected much sania (pus), that you perforate it and do not attempt to extract all the matter at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then apply an ointment to the abscess until another day, and then extract a larger part, and then make many evacuations according to graduation until it is fully purged.
And especially if the patient is of a fragile nature, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved in the egress of the pus, and it kills the patient, and you open them.
Be careful with this chapter, and consider your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, lest you spread the plague and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is small, or it is a plain section, then administer the remedies of oil or of anticote; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is good that you pause in some traction until they come to an end.
And if in the abscess is detached a part of the codena (tumor or swelling) or has concaved it in the circuit, then it is good that you complete it with oil very much or with thread made from cloth of linen, thus as when you have treated pans or razors, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then process it and cure what is good for the enguents until it is sanitized.
Many times it happens that there is a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and wine in those which mix with a cloth of linen, and apply it over the area of the flow of blood many times.
Many times the flow of blood persists, then it is good that you administer regimen and cure and powders which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Many times it is in winter time, and the location of the abscess is a location of many nerves, then it is good that you apply poultices in wine and oil, and pause them over the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is good that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of that should be fresh until the third day, as we have said, and then it is good that you dissolve the abscess and spread it out and administer to its cure what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
And thus it is necessary to know the cure of abscesses universally, many times according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is via the cure of it by chapters singularly.
Chapter 41.
On the sections of abscesses that come in the tumor of the head.
In the tumor of the head small abscesses, and they are of species of nodes that contain tunics that are at their surface; and the species of theirs are many.
And they are pungent, and those that contain humidity similar to lime. And those that contain humidity similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and those that are lithargeous, hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since one must not make a counter-irrigation with the extraction of those.
And the operation in section of those is that you sprinkle those with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Because if there is humidity that contains it, then separate it according to the length and section into a superficial section in this form.
It begins in the section of the line B and ends at the line G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of it all, because many evacuated things return, if they remain for some cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and let it enter another day, because I think it corrodes all so that it removes from that skin.
And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink secondly and thirdly if it is indicated by it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form. It has the shape of a cross, and cuts between two labia of the section and scrapes all of that partition, and forces your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Perhaps if you have made a counter-contraction, then do so that you first recontract primarily.
And similarly, make a lapified abscess of section and cure according to what you have said; and the section over the lapified abscess is less serious, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some veins are so close to these abscesses which are in the head in some homes where there is no humidity; which causes that you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and you touch the abscess thus with a rough, asperous, white stone, which cannot be touched, and if someone was struck by it, they would plague her.
Perhaps in other accidental abscesses on the head another chapter is not this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and deviate from the roots of the ears, perhaps the section of all these should be superficial.
And pause the perforation of those of the lower part, beneath their skin, so that the body of the sanitas is alleviated at the lower parts.
And then cure those with water that converges to that of healing.
Chapter 42.
About the section of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Many evacuated abscesses occur in the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some evacuated ones occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all the scrofula of those is within its proper tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscess of the head, thus as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some of them are lapified, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey healing.
Then in that one which you have of good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is mauled to all part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not swollen, so that you incise it in a superficial section of the upper part beneath the body of the line G. up to the line B., and scrape all of that part, and extend two labia of the codena on one side, or many sides if there is need of those, thus as we have said about the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
And it is a space not very agitated, that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that disturbs the malaute, and that incises what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or artery and prohibited yourself from the operation, then pause on the veterinary plague treated with trissat powder or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and let it enter until the acuity of the abscess is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purified. When the blood is absorbed.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire if it is said indicated that there remains some cause of the other small scrofulas, so incise them and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its root. Beware lest you split that into a double file and let it enter until it falls by itself without nuisance.
And then fill the cotton cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian vinegar, and then take care of it.
And if you inject the entire serum, then make sure that you adjust the two lips of the cloth and sew them up so tightly that no superfluity remains.
Perhaps sometimes there remains superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, make sure that you intend to inject the root of it, and extract it and administer a gentle suture, which is said.
And in those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of that which collects the pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with a poultice and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the cloth is already purified, then you take care of it with a poultice of generating flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the section of the pilum of the accidental aposteme that occurred in the gland.
The ancients made this section in the pilum, and we did not see anyone in our land who had done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Perhaps in some men there is awkwardness, make sure that the extraction of the pilum is avoided, as it is not done jovially for all the veins and major parts of the thigh are located here.
Perhaps in those who have apostemes caught in the mouth or gland or two ears, when the malady is not in the cane, make sure to use the section of pilum to flee from the loss which is done by perforation.
So make sure when we want to do it, that they inject the pilum below three circles of the circles of the pilum, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of sacred blood are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, make sure then that he extends the cord of the gland with an onion, and then inserts the cord until it reaches the canal, perhaps evading the sacred veins if he sees some other cause.
And then inject the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux which is from that exit into what is of the body's disorder and for the abolition of the vote.
And then leave the cloth open for some time.
So when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the cloth, and sew it only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And thus says Albucasis that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these apostemes had operated on the gland of the thigh, and the thigh has come to death, and its wing is between the scapulae, and some go to inject the epiglos so that the thigh breathes over the place of the cloth for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
And for this command to leave the cloth open until the malice of the malady is consumed; and it is the malice of it for three days; and then command thus the cloth, and take care of it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my own eyes, is that a servant held a knife and dissected the gland in the sieve of the pulmonary canal, and I was called to its cure, and I touched the vein as it was touched by the dead, and discovered the cloth and touched the sacred blood which was coming out of the small cloth.
So I must confess that it had not injected a vein or guided, and the wind was coming out of the cloth, and I took care of it until it was healed.
And do not accuse the servant if it does not recover in the vote, and then some days returned to the administration of its own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the pilum there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
On the section about the aposteme that occurs in the gland beforehand, and it is called hernia of the gland.
This aposteme named hernia of the gland is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is more in women.
And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to green nodes, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme that is made by constriction of the artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not cover that which makes a presumptuous abscess on the cum unless it is small in size. And you probe that and investigate what is said, and if you find the similar nodules of fat, and it does not suspend any of the veins, then you incise those thus with the nodes, and extract what contains the skin and bursicle; and if not, then the whole serum is scrutinized, and you cure the area thus that it covers the treatment until it is sanitized.
Chapter 45.
On the section of the species of knots.
The knots have many species and you have already said all the species of them in the division.
And it covers that you recommend thus the difference between a knot and an excrescence with a dubious abscess.
So you say that an excrescence is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is sedated; and it is a completed putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But a knot does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains a certain cipher which is its own proper secret.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, either very fat and containing humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what you have said in the division.
So it covers, when you penetrate to the cure of a knot, that you expose it and inquire into its beginning with a thorough examination which is called introgressions, according to what will be seen in its form in the chapter that is apropos to this.
And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you find humidity which you find in the abscess, and you turn the threads slowly little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
And then you ultimately place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introgressions and consider what is found in the vestige of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it in a superficial section according to what was said about other abscesses.
And if from the vestige of the introgressions there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
And it cuts above it in a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus you instruct, and suspend that which is above, and excavate the core of all parts to facilitate, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, above that and extract that sania from the knot.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many veins are found there, and then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains for any reason.
Because if it remains from nothing, little or too much, the knot returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague of certain corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause above that which sits as a cautious abscess, and cure it with another treatment until it is sanitized.
And if it is a large knot, then you cut the two lips of it and cure it thus that it incorporates.
But if the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsatile, then you cauterize and fill the space with a triple-distilled vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the plague is purged and the ebullition of the blood ceases; and then return to incise what remains of the knot.
Chapter 46.
On the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
On those are the forms of the introgressions, and they are of three species, that is, one large, one medium, and one small.
The form of the large introgression is this:
The form of the small introgression is this:
Thus they are made of iron, of alloy, of well-tempered extremities, so that they hold the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named sharpened, and one of them is called pointed.
And they are of three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experiment, form of it:
The form of the medium experiment, form of it:
The form of the small experiment, form of it:
It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and excrescences and fistulas and buboes, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
And they are made with round, thick, lion-like, thus with large needles which are coated with silk threads, and are made of silver, or of iron, or of copper, And the best ones are those made of silver.
They are experienced in the use of black lead, which is ordered to be administered through those uterine fistulas in the cavity, which are reflected and reflected back with their lightness.
It is of three species, namely those with long and slender necks, and of others with short and narrow ones, according to the quantity of the amulet of the fistula and the structure of it.
Form of experienced great lead plaster:
Form of experienced smaller lead plaster:
Form of experienced small lead plaster:
The forms of the onions are of many species, namely those with simple necks, which have a single curvature only, and of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of their own onions, and of three species.
And of those onions that have two curvatures, and of three species.
And of their own having three curvatures, and of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple onion, form of it:
Form of a large onion having two curvatures: Form of a medium-sized onion having two curvatures: Form of a small onion having two curvatures:
Form of a large onion having three curvatures:
Form of a medium-sized onion having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and apostems, and they are of three species, namely those that are large, medium-sized, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those that are made for sharp cutting and the other extremities not for cutting, and not paused in such a way, but rather made to be done quickly in the excavation of nodes, fearing the incision of a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be sanctified and tranquility may be obtained for a little while, which is necessary for the excoriation of the apostem.
And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small, thus as you see.
They are made of iron and similar to a file, which is what makes them alkaline.
And it is in the pointed extremity of the spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and before, when you want, thus as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are used to remove the dead skin between the fingers for the perforation of apostems and do not perceive the evils, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventoses which are used to absorb the flow of blood, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small; the forms of it:
They are made of citrus iron, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is seen that these species of ventoses are large, medium-sized, and small, so that they absorb the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
However, they do not use them to absorb blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy locations, thus as in the muscles of the arms and legs, and in the muscles of the chest, and of the belly and groin, and similarly to their fleshy muscle locations.
And some veins are made of those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy, or through incision of a vein or artery.
And some veins are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which are assembled from women.
Some veins are inflated the breasts of some men who have the complement of sleeping with women, and thus they are inflated, and their breasts are assembled from those of women, and Roman apostems, loosened.
And to him who has this, it is seen that incisions are made with lunar cutting according to this form, from line B to line G, and thus the entire ugliness is excised, and thus the plague of incarnated medicine is filled, and thus the two labia of the plague are adjusted with cosideration, and cures him so that he may be sanctified.
When the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its own greatness, then it is divided into two parts, with two similar sections resembling a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line .B. and the line .G. Then scrape the kernel that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for healing so that it may be healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of what covers the wound per the anxiety of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with submergent corrosive oil and let it corrode so that it removes the greyish scab, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
About the piercing of abscesses that come from the thigh.
These abscesses that come from the thigh are of the species of scrofulas, hard, which contain a pellet that is sacred.
And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity need to be incised in a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all is evacuated, what is in the abscess of the shin, then you complete it with much veil and leave it until another day.
And then the wound should be dressed and cared for in a convenient and suitable way, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess is of the species of knots, and of scrofulas, then you should section above it as we have said in the section about scrofulas, with a circular incision.
When the wound is extended in such a way that it produces pus, then administer a cautery according to what we have said about that.
Chapter 49.
About the section of abscesses that occur due to arterial or venous causes.
When an artery is broken, and the kernel that is above it is consolidated, then many vague symptoms occur, and in those signs it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is due to an artery, it is often gathered in the chest of the body; and when you touch the abscess on the outer surface, you feel a stridor.
And that which is due to a vein appears as a manifest swelling of the body.
And the section about this abscess is erroneous, and it worsens in those that are below the wings, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to evacuate its cure, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary to avoid.
When it is about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, section in the kernel cavity in the lung; and then open the section with an inch and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then put the needle over that agulha and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to have an excess of blood in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then prick the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which is generated pus until the ligaments fall; and then care for it with a convenient dressing according to what is necessary until it is healthy.
And if it is an abscess due to a section of vein, then it is necessary that you hold your hand on the place where the abscess is in the kernel, and then insert the needle below the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be with double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what has been said to you about the ligament of the grapevine, which is in two parts at the extremities of the thread.
When you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread into the needle below all the abscess from the incision of the primary needle, and strengthen the tied threads in four places.
Then section the abscess in the middle place of it until when you have sat what is in it, then you incise the superfluity of the kernel, and let it be that what is of it is tied.
And then pause about the pus that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with warm poultices and dressings until it is healthy.
Chapter 50: About the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they occur due to percussion or due to superfluous trouble, and for similar reasons.
It is necessary to apply the mayo on the locations of the joints or ankle, or in every place where the joints are affected.
It is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the greatest predispositions of their own disposition, and when it is straitened by vehemence, it seems like stupidity in the patient.
It is not an abscess added to the chest of the body, and therefore it has left the coda, and it is affected in all parts and does not go to the anterior or posterior parts.
Therefore, it is clear that those who are in the joints do not think they are invaded by iron, because their strong contraction is evident.
Maybe he who is in the head or in the forehead feels the coda with a spatula-like feeling. Maybe if it is a small abscess, then you have the forces and separate it from its roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it in an uncino, and excavate it, and afterwards you remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Head or chapter.
About the section of abscesses which arise from the skin that arise in the abdomen.
It is found in certain moist places in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies where they have fungal ulcers, called funguals by similarity to fungi, whose roots are subtle and at the head of that which is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in their belly there were two ulcers that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and humidity flowed from that entire time.
Therefore I dissected them and attributed it to one of 18 measures. and the other one in six measures.
And the operation in their dissection is that I consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you dissect them with a broad spatula, and they are in your presence with cauteries on the focus, because many moist places expel very sanctified matter; and if you want to cauterize it, cauterize that.
And if the patient is poor and timid, beware of dissecting with iron; maybe then take a recently made filigree of lead, and strengthen it on that skin, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the structure of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large lead grain that is in the skin, until it is separated and falls out by itself.
Maybe if the skin is of thick root, then in its dissection there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Maybe it is possible that you dissect the deadness of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healthy.
And beware that you do not presume to dissect the skin that is of dark color, of little sensation, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I find it in remembrance of cancer, therefore I say so.
Chapter two.
About the treatment of umbilical hernia.
Umbilical hernia is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the navel which is above the belly, and sometimes the skin or intestine bursts out according to other ruptures; or by sanctified matter that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Maybe if it is by fissure of the navel and by bursting of the skin, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it has a strong pain, and appears in diverse situations. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that which we have recounted, of many violent diversities, and as you press on those ties that are hidden, and then returns; and strongly it is in that way, and it is very magnificent with many introjections of bath and violent struggles.
Maybe if it is by humidity, then it is clear and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is by sanctified matter, then at that time the abscess appears with blackish decline.
Maybe if it is by flesh alone, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity.
Maybe if it is by ventilation, then the touch of it is clear.
And the operation on it is that I consider then if the umbilical hernia is by sanctified matter of artery, or of vein, or by ventilation; then I think that you should be prohibited from the treatment of it, because in that there is fear and pain also as I have written in the chapter where I said about abscesses by artery and by vein.
If the eminence of the navel is due to intestine or abdomen, then it is commanded that the patient hold their left side, and be straight extended; and place a sign in the circuit of the entire navel, and command them to stand inverted between their two sides above the left side, and circulate spatula flat in the circuit of the navel over the area where they have sensed the tent; and extend the majesty of the apostema to the divided parts below an inch grand; and place it in the circuit with a strong faith or in the manner of decent liar.
And place the majesty of the extended apostema on the ligament and introduce the finger in that index and examine if the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then extract the extraneous and impel the intestine to the divided parts within the belly.
And if you have touched the abdomen, then take it in an inch; and remove the superfluities of it.
Maybe it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that motion, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong fields and insert the two needles in the circuit which has made a turn around the apostema in the manner of a cross, which makes them penetrate; and strengthen the apostema in four parts above the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh may shrink back and fall by itself; or remove what is subtle and shrinks, and cure that inch which comes from the swellings within, so that it may be sanitized.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to flesh or humidity, then it is commanded that you conquer the apostema thus as we have said and expel the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and cure that inch which comes from it and consolidates the area.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have said, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is necessary to be cautious in the cure so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And we have stated that some ancient physicians said that certain types of cancer are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and resembles the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Maybe when it is old and grave, it does not command that you appropriate it to itself, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor has it been made to reach that.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated thus as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile certain evacuated, and then you will know that, if it is touched, a manifest replication.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which place is located for operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncis those that command to it; and then concave all parts of the code in good perexcrutacio so that no remainder of any cause of the roots of it. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that ligament, and expel the places, and clear the large blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible to use among the instruments.
Maybe if you have made counterpressure of large blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another cure so that it may be sanitized.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not only the species of altaea alone, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypsocha, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been debilitated, or is in another bad dropsy, thus as if it is in the toes or belly and resembles those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Maybe if you see the patient with an exuberant vertigo, and in it there is no other badness but only dropsy, and not an infant nor old, then the manner of the operation on it is that you elevate the patient between their two sides, and minister to them to expel the belly of it with their own hand, injecting water at the part below the navel, and then take spiny spatula according to this form.
It should be of two acute long parts, of acute extremity thus as spatula; maybe however it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation on that it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to that.
And you should also consider whether the generation of hydropic humor is from parts of the intestines, because then it becomes clear that you have the section tied to the navel for three digits on each side, in the right direction above the umbilical area.
Maybe the generation of hydropic humor is due to bad liver function, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the mixing, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not good that your section should be on the side where you want to move the bad liver in order to prevent corrupting the excessive fluids at that free location.
And then perforate with the entire instrument through the cistern, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand between the cistern and the siphan, and you will excavate it; and if the quantity is of one ounce or around.
And then perforate the siphan so that you bring the spatium to the desired location, and it is there where the water is. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden alloy, at which in the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is shaped like the extremity of a bird's feather, thus sometimes.
And at the extremity of it there is a hook, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it absorbs onto the instrument, thus evacuating the water in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not agree with the hour, strongly affecting the bad liver by resolution of the animal spirit, or it approaches the five signs that are near death.
Maybe evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the bad liver's virtue in its poles and its goodness indicate to you.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused because it is retained for so long by the cistern that retains the tube which is above the siphan, of which I recommend to you that you perforate it in that manner.
And then iterate with the instrument another day if the bad liver tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do it for several days on account of fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove enough water.
Maybe if you fear about the bad liver, and let go of a large quantity of water, then cure it by burying it in hot sand, and moving it to a warm bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the mixing and the liver, according to the extraction of water, as you have been advised in what has been said before.
It seems like we've reached the end of the medieval medical treatise! It was a fascinating journey through this unique language, which blended elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I hope our collaboration helped to uncover the secrets of this ancient text. If you have any more texts or projects, feel free to reach out to me anytime for assistance!
Here's a new translation:
Some birthmarks of some children are from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a straight tube or is not in its place).
Then it is good to create a perforation of the spatium as soon as it is born, with a very subtle instrument according to this form:
And then pause in the tube a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the location will not leave this clarity.
Maybe that one whose tube is straight should be medicated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Maybe those in which the tube is not in its place, are led astray, because of this, one who is born and has a tube that is far from the end of the head of the rod, cannot urinate on the divided parts, until it elevates the rod with his hand to the divided parts above; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is very bad and lagging.
And the manner of operation on it is that the bad liver is invested over the six fingers, and then extend the head of the rod with your left hand in vehement extraction, and insert the head of the rod at the location of the perpucii in a subtle spatium, as if it were an insertion of feathers, or you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the vein seems like the head of the rod and the tube falls into its proper place according to what is good.
And take care that in your operation to let out blood, because many times it happens that the vein collapses; and stop yourself at once from what absolves the blood, and cure the wound so that it heals itself.
Chapter 56.
About the ulcer that occurs on the foreskin of the penis and about corruption and blackening and adherence of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Many times ulcers occur on the penis and it is a sign of decaying flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend an uncum subtile and absolve it so that the whole mass is dissolved; and then stop above the subtle cotyledon that has been submerged in Egyptian oil; and then, cure the wound with a diafinicon ointment so that it is healthy.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the incision and the root of it.
Moreover, if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the penis in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer that is inside from the beginning so that it consolidates; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be wounded again.
And similarly, ulcers occur on the genitals and on the black and corrupt foreskin, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that has been denied and that wants to corrupt or that is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with a mixture of honey, which is contaminated with flour of scorched millet and errors, trissatz and crivellatz.
And then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
Moreover, if you want to let out blood, then apply a lunar cautery in this form:
because juvenile cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and totally destroyed in an hour, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a tube of lead so that the bad urine flows through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in one whose foreskin is sound, and over it circumcision has not been performed; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or aposteme) it is necessary that you scrape with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to disjoin those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some reason of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a subtle drizzle, which has already been softened in lukewarm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
And then it is cured with a stipptic wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
About the purification of children and the cure of what occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus with other wounds: however, since it is our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle path to salvation.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they didn't use it in their writings, and it is only because we have acquired it by experiment, which causes the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a novacula and torches; and they use ligament with faith and incision with a nail.
And I have already prohibited all these manners and did not find better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because many times it flees from below, because the code of the foreskin has two tunics, and one tunic is below, and therefore it is forced to another incision and secure pain. And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and is digital, of which the sabatiers use, it does not secure the incision of the extremity of the virile member, because therefore it enters into the hole of it.
Moreover, in the operation with the nail, therefore it obstructs iron and corrupts your operation. And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it occurs in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
Moreover, about the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with faith, goodness, experiment has discovered to me that the forceps are of proportional incision, because what is below is thus with what is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally, and incise in a single time; and it is made a compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the penis in all parts, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the infant stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a little, not making them lie except that you place them in their correct posture only, and that they leave that inside until another day.
And then cheer them up in all that manner which is possible for them to receive their intelligence. And then have them stay between your arms in a prepared and stable position, and do not be careless; and hide the forceps in your hand or place them under your foot, so that the infant does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the infant's buttock and blow on the spine, and pull that inside so that it comes out at the head of the buttock, and then declare that which is added to it from the filth.
The shape of the forceps for manipulation, this is the shape:
Some are external not-twisting and the others are twisting, so that it does not exit the branch of the nail, and is the length of the two fingers thus as the length of two wrists in engagement.
The mistake in manipulation is because you strongly force the internal spine entirely, or a part of it deviates from its insertion.
So cover that you extend it at your hour to your finger before the aposteme of the place and that you insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a nail and insert it.
But if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflamed beneath the buttock's aposteme, then let it be until the cautious aposteme is released, and excavate that which is facilitated, and insert according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the buttock, lest it hurts there.
And then take care to heal it with the powder that consolidates the plague, which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted into the spine with measure, and you have obstructed the parts above, that does not harm it.
And take care to heal it in the way we have said until it is healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by purulence or by flesh, and it resembles that which we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in that which we have said the vehement is made the cause above the patient, then cover that you administer extraction of it with an instrument called siringua, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and very subtle, like a canal of peacock's feather in subtlety of a long ray in similitude to a palm and a half, at which it should be very subtle at its head.
And the manner of evacuating urine through it is that you take the double-edged knife and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good liaison; and insert the extremities of the knife into the part beneath the siringua, and insert with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but then introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you enfold the siringua in a bandage and album of honey.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and envelop the bladder with it and the buttock with oil of olive and apricot.
And then insert the siringua to facilitate until it reaches the root of the buttock; and then double the buttock above the part of the navel; and then fill the siringua within that; and then fill that until it reaches the bladder, and that cures the patient of the void cause, and it is not done thus according to this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And you should extend the filament in the little wool gently, because the urine dries the little wool.
You should extract that and make a circle for urination, and use a pipe, don't stop until the bladder and the patient's abdomen are relieved.
Chapter 6.
About the quality of the enema of the bladder, I have included in the clamp and similarly instrumental things that are suitable for it.
When ulcers occur in the bladder or abscesses, or blood clots in it, or there is a contraction of the pores, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make an instrument which is called a clamp, and this is its form:
but on the outside of it there is a stopper, so it is closed. And in it there are three tubes: two from one part, and thus at times.
At the beginning it is a container, in which there is what is received, and it is according to the quantity that one receives from it, until when some cause draws away from the humidity, it is drawn away, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn away, and when it is expelled slowly, according to what the clamp makes in the way of receiving naptha in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw with that water which is received from the parts above, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the orifice according to what we have recommended in the pipe; and then receive the humidity with that water which receives, because that humidity penetrates into the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle syringe by which the bladder is syringed, and this is its shape:
And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so shaped as to resemble a small feather, and below there is a tube with a flexible ligament.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause there the humidity that you want to inject into the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the syringe into the orifice.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already penetrated into the bladder.
But if you are not present with the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread into those tubes, thus revolving; and then add the circle thus added to the softness, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and dissolve and filter.
And then you tie that to the instrument and make it thus as you have made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Chapter 10.
About the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone in which the operation is done with a knife, and sectioning.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now narrate that in a clear and brief exposition.
So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his orifice, and many veins are swollen, and then it is treated; and with that you should make a hole in the cul-de-sac in some of those veins.
And it is difficult to heal the health of children under the age of 14 until they have reached 13 years; and it is difficult to cure in old people. But in the young it is half-cured because it is between those ages.
And of that which the stone is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with a syringe which extracts all the filth which is in the sieves of the intestine; because that filth sometimes prohibits the evacuation of the stone and hinders its expulsion.
And then take the patient to the sieves of the feet and let it be constricted and massaged in order that the stone may descend to the opening of the bladder, or jump from its place with some veins.
And then make that circle between your hands well prepared, and the hands of it are below the thighs of it, so that the entire bladder may be made to decline towards the parts below.
And then thoroughly clean that entire affected area beforehand.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then you will soon be able to remove it from there with a section.
And if you do not touch the entire toe at that time, then take care to anoint the indicated toe with olive oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with a mild ointment if they are a young adult, and apply it to the affected area of the back. And thoroughly clean around the stone that was beneath the toe mentioned. And gradually move it little by little towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press above that on the mentioned toe, and push it out through the partitions beforehand you remove it from the place of the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand between the genitalia above, and their other hand remaining on the codename which is beneath the genitalia, in the part of the place where the section is made.
And then insert a spatula between the cut of the one that is the shape of it: and divide in the water that is between the back and the genitalia, not in the middle place, beyond the width of the left thigh; and let the section be above that stone and the mentioned toe, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section beforehand is wide and straight according to the quantity that you can remove from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because you comprehend that the toe mentioned, which has the stone in the back, will be forgotten without difficulty.
And know that some of the stone has corners and margins, because its removal is made difficult by those.
And of that water it seems like a similar gleam, and it is round, and its removal is made easy.
So if it has those corners and margins, adjust it to the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten in that way, then take care to ingeniously place something over it, or to strengthen it decently with the extremity which is thus like a file on the one you strengthened over the stone, and do not avoid it; or to insert beneath it the subtle curved instrument.
But if you cannot operate on it, then amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a strengthened instrument treated with vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it; and then push a little further in; and similarly make many movements more than two.
And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you insert the large section, because it hurts the patient for two reasons: either it kills or it impedes the continuous flow of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
But administer an expulsion of it from the inside so that it is forgotten, or ingeniously break it with the forceps into fragments so that you extract it in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And put a dressing on that wound infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and cold water, so that the post-operative abscess may be cooled.
And then reset the patient on their back, and do not disturb the dressing until the third day.
And when that has been disturbed, bathe the place with water and much oil, and then take care to heal it with gentle icon and gentle bazilicon until it is healthy.
But if in the wound apostema causes heat, adjustment and corrosion, and it seems like the blood is in the bladder congealed, and for that reason the urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood with the urine), then insert the mentioned toe into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose all species, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healthy.
And take care in all the hours of the entire cure that you read the instructions and adjust the medicines which are paused on the place.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the bladder, and is fixed in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure it with that which you recommended beforehand so that you may arrive at a section, because many times veiled for this cure and accused of section; and already you have experienced that, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the shape:
of triangular external shape, pointed, fixed in a hollow.
And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the wound, piercing it in order to facilitate the flow of pus out of that abscess. You turn the piercer with your hand in that small abscess little by little, and you make the piercing of it so that the other part's penetration is facilitated; because the urine is almost absorbed.
And then place your hand on that which is scraped from the abscess of the affected part before the wound, because it is drained, and it is discharged into the urine, and the patient is healed.
Perhaps if this cure is not adapted to you for some reason that prohibits it, then apply a ligature below the abscess, and another ligature above the abscess. And then bind tightly over the abscess in that wound between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then dissolve the ligature and mollify the congested blood, which is done in the poultice.
And it is not necessary to ligate with a thread below the abscess, but rather so that it does not return to the vesicle, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is dissolved, the abscess returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that reason it is necessary to ligate above with the thread, so that you elevate the abscess to the upper parts, or it returns to its own complement, and covers the wound thus, as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of abscesses from women's thighs.
Abscess on women's thighs is rarely generated.
Perhaps if you see an abscess in one of those, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many treatments.
One of them is because the woman's thighs are varicose.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe the measurement to the doctor when it is cast, or it is of women having husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision over the abscess on women's thighs is far from the place of the abscess, because it requires a deep incision, and in that there is fear.
Perhaps it is necessary to provoke you to this, then it is certain that you will take a wise woman who knows how to treat, and few are experienced.
Perhaps if you are deprived of that, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the art, or presents a mature woman who is skilled in the art of women, or a woman who has a part of the art.
Then make that woman present, and command her to do all that you will order, from the investigation of the abscess to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman is varicose, then it is certain that you put your finger in her fundament and search for the abscess.
Then if you find that, cut away below your finger, and then command her to insert it into that.
Perhaps if it is not varicose, then command the mature woman to insert her finger into the hollow of the patient's thigh and search for the abscess, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and compresses that with good compression.
Then if you find that, then it is certain that gradually you will draw it away from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts below the umbilicus, until you arrive at that point where the abscess adheres to the base of the thigh.
And then insert it into that apposition of the mallet on the hollow of the thigh where it adheres to the base of the thigh, and fix the abscess in that part, so that the finger is not removed from the abscess, cutting away below it.
And the incision is few at the beginning; and then insert the scalpel over that incision, and if you feel the abscess, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which you know will be sufficient to extract the abscess from that.
And you know that the species of abscesses are many: because among them there is small and large, and lean and rough, and long and round, and having ramps.
Then you know how many species are of it for that which you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vertebral location thrice and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the abscess is forgotten.
And make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of abscesses in women, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is inserted, then you stop powder on the location and strengthen it with pulvis and strict descent, and do not iterate that; and leave the abscess alone and do not extract it, because otherwise the patient will die. And then treat the wound.
When the acidity of the blood is cleansed, then place warm cloths on the affected area, and return to your usual operation so that the fever may be forgotten.
Chapter 62.
About the treatment of hernia with a burning remedy.
Hernia is not just an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane that contains the humor, and it is named membrane.
And some evacuations are in the proper natural preparation of the part of the humor, so that it is known that there is another humor; and it is the code of the genius between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not just bitter.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genius, because in those it is founded, and some veins are affected by percussion or blows on the genius.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or blood-red, or red, or black and filthy, or whitish-yellow, and that is what is worst.
And the signs by which it is known that this aggregation of water is such: because if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess is declining a little in length, thus forming the figure of a humor, and the genius appears, because the humidity contains all parts.
And if the humidity is in its proper natural part, then the abscess is declining in the part of the humor and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the code of the genius and the white membrane, then it takes away the sentiment.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you examine the color of the humidity in the abscess, which is surrounded by a circle of inflammation, and according to what is seen in the vestige of the inflammation, judge that it is deducted from there.
So when we come to the cure of the iron deficiency, then it is necessary that we command the patient to take flebotomate if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron.
And then return to re-supinate over the two fingers on some cause a little higher, and stop there for a few drops.
And then place you on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod from two lines to the code of the genius and to the part of the miraculous ventricle.
And then take a broad spatula and separate the code of the genius from my middle place for the length, so as to approach the fifth finger.
And make the section according to the rectified engagement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genius, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert it; and your scraping is the one that scrapes for the part of the humor, which is suspended in the worst humor and subtly examined in the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
And then perforate the membrane full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with uncials, and extend the membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the code of the genius comprehending, and insert the membrane in such a way that is possible for you. And insert it in its totality or in pieces, and enlarge the subtle finger slowly, because if you do not make the insertion of it exquisitely, it is not made securely so that the water does not return.
More so the humor proceeds from that defect of its code at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the membrane, return to deduct it, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genius with a suture, and then treat it thus like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the humor is corrupted by another bad quality, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are above the suspensors, and extract the humor, and then treat it thus in what we have said.
More so the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore insert that part according to what was done in the other engagement; and if it is seen by you that it is a work, then do it.
And then you purify the blood, and enter into the clear sections of the submerged oil or rozated oil; and stop before another section which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two geniuses and the miraculous ventricle; and stop above drops of doubled oil and pulvils, and tie them above the liament which is according to this form:
And then press two drops and fill the submerged oil according to this likeness; and make points on the extremities which are premuted by cot or humid oil, and add structure in the braquier of the arms, and one of the extremities takes hold of the cul up to the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the fifth finger, and two extremities over two thighs below and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the braquier of the arms.
Some hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in the area of the section in iron; and it is that you should take a subtle cutting cautery and insert it into the codename of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what has been recommended, until the white ciphac containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form. and it is assembled into a Greek letter.
And then you pierce that ciphac, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
And then you extend the ciphac into inches, and scrape them with inches, and scrape them with a subtle ignited cautery; and you insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hole that the fire does not touch.
And you know that this operation is more salvageable and farther from the flow of blood, and better than an operation in section.
Perhaps if you find an opposing apostem to the cautery at the time of section or at the time of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure which opposing apostem you have for that, with a curative treatment that suits it according to what has been said.
Perhaps if the patient is weak, and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which has been said about the symptoms, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you seat the patient on a certain elevated chair, then perforate the apostem at the lowest part of their spatium laterally, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And it is the broad perception until all the water is drained.
And then stop at the short place and tie it with a ligature, so that the remaining water is drained. And then heal it until the wound is healed.
Perhaps if the opposition is at the urgency of the water at that hour you perforate it: and this is not done except for when the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the issuance of the water, then it is necessary that you put in the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropitz, in the form which precedes; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and it is augmented after six months or around those; and as it is augmented, then it should be perforated according to that same method, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
About section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
You know that in the section about this hernia, there is a great fear of losing it due to the major dispositions; because for me it has been seen as a dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
And you are reminded of the operation on that and the species of the apostems.
Therefore, it is said that the apostems are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharp inflammation, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
And it is the color of the apostem according to the color of the body, and it is not troubled by pain, and it is a heavy apostem.
And therefore it is a lappified apostem, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel anything.
And some hernias are caused by nodulation of the arteries, and for inflation of those also because it has not perceived the memory of it, or for inflation of veins.
Perhaps it is for inflation of arteries that is recognized by the dispersion of the apostem when it compresses them with its fingers; and it does not seem that it touches.
Perhaps that which is caused by inflation of a vein is not dispersed from some cause, because of the compression with its fingers.
And it is possible that about this species a section was made and about the other carnal parts; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then stop the hole at the superior parts, and extract it from the white ciphac, and remove the suspensori of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensori so that you remove it from all the superior parts of the hole.
Therefore, if the hole is already consolidated in those carnal parts, then it is necessary that you extract the hole and insert it.
And if it is adhesion until some cause of the ciphac, or between what is between the veins, then it is necessary that you remove all that adhesion and insert it for a round insertion.
Perhaps if it is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of it, and extract the hole thus as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the woolen pouch with oil and rose water, and take care to cure the other wounds from within so that they may be healthy.
Chapter 64.
About the treatment of hernia that is of a vitrine (glass-like) nature.
It is an abscess enclosed by some wrapping resembling a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult the exercise of movement and walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is by fear for water of which it is preceded by remembrance.
However, I think that I should advise operation in that case, as I did with the first ones.
And I say that you should place the patient on a elevated seat; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie the cord of the genitals with threads that are probably tied to the rods; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend those with vehement extension.
And then insert a spatula laterally through a transverse incision in the right of the veins, until the veins are uncovered.
And then scrape off the entire affected area, just as you have said in the extraction of artery roots which are in the temples.
And then leave a needle in which there is double filament, and tie it at the beginning of the place where you have inserted life, and tie the other end in the back of them. And then insert them in the middle place for a right incision according to the length of the body, and extract the water that is augmented by the foul and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure for the other wounds in which you want to be healthy, so that the veins, which are not nourished by one of the two genitals, may not be bad for it.
But if life is inserted into all the veins, then I think that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for it are cut off from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the insertion of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that they are cut off so that there is no youthful vigor in them.
Chapter 65.
About the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the extended cipher above the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by sending the intestines of that rupture to another place of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the cipher or of exhaustion of it, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by outcry, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the cipher, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess enclosed within, until you feel the pain, so that the cipher compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is by incision of the cipher, because at the beginning it makes a vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing differently below the fallen cord, and this is by evacuation of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the cipher.
And some evacuations are outside the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia circling around.
And some evacuations are made in the ventosity, and some evacuations run into the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is a great perturbation of the illness, and some evacuations make bad pain and worsening when it is premature.
And in the treatment of the species of this illness iron is feared, because I think that it should be avoided in that case.
And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity through the parts within its conquest, if it obeys to its own returnment, and then it is invested above the column between your two hands, and raises the legs of it.
And then stop the cord which is the cord of the testicles at the lower parts, and insert the entire cord of the testicles for the length; and then fix it in two labia of the incision uncis according to what you need to close the incision with them.
And if the incision is according to the quantity that it is possible for you, then the hole may be evacuated from that.
And then scrape off that membrane which is below the cord of the testicles, until the white and hard cipher of each part is uncovered.
Then you insert the thread said in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white cipher, which is below the cord of the hole, and between the cipher according to, and absolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
And then you should place the hand on the back of the testicles, and also extend the white wax on the hand to the left side, and elevate the finger on the wax to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the finger in it and dissolve the adhesion that is behind the solution completed.
You should search for the veins there, to see if there is not any cause of the intestine wrapped in the hard white wax. Maybe you will find some cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly from below.
And then you will thread into the part behind the back of the testicles for a section from which clear blood and sane serum will flow, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then you will administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligature that we have recommended (and some veiled white wax is cauterized, which we have said to thread into the temenos of flux of blood, because many veiled ones occur) and release the ligature within so that it falls by itself.
Maybe the healing of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then you will cure the plague with another cure for plagues until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
About windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been hardened under the cure of the iron hammer.
And the first doctors said that it was done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with us; which is that you lift the veins towards the section above that and make a cut in the middle place around the abscess in what you open, until the veins fall.
And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
About the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Some veiled ones cause rupture in the ankles thus as we have said, and empty the place.
And they do not show any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in a few hours.
Maybe if the time is prolonged in this, it is adjusted to make a fissure in the wax until the intestine descends into the wax; and it occurs thus for the extension of the wax which is in the ankles as we have said, which causes because the wax is extended, and then it is softened and the place becomes abscessed and empty.
And the cure of it is with a cautery thus as the narration of it has preceded.
And some veiled ones are cured with iron according to this method: it is that the patient lies on their back between the two hands, and then you make a cut in the place of the rupture of the abscesses emptying into a section according to the latitude as much as three fingers.
And then you will strengthen the white wax that is behind the back until it is discovered.
And then you will take the vein and pause it on the prominent place of the wax, and press it onto the belly.
And then you will kiss the two prominent places on the extremity of the vein of the wax, and adjust one of them to the other with a suture.
And then you will extract the extremity of the vein, and do not thread into the wax at all, nor extend the finger, nor any other cause thus as you know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then you will cure it with the cure of plagues, and as you thread the veins, purify it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; because the wax is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proximal to health.
Chapter 18.
On the softening of the codename of the testicles.
Moisture is softened in the codename of the testicles in some men it is softened by thus quar because the flesh that is there is softened, and its treatment is neglected.
Therefore it is necessary for one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient sit according to his two hips, and to sew up the entire codename which is softened over the natural codename; and then adjust both lips at the suture.
And if you wish, thus in the beginning the redundancy of the softened codename with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then take care to cure other wounds within so that it may be healthy and the veins may flow.
Chapter 19.
On Castration.
I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is so that the doctor may be knowledgeable about the cure of those who are affected by it, who knows how to treat it; and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our young animals, like mules, and goats, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by section of the seed.
Moreover in that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take those with your hand into the wound so that they are resolved and do not appear again in the touch.
Moreover in castration done by section and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders, and insert above each one of them a section until two vessels proceed.
And then insert those pus so that they may be drained out. And do not leave anything above them on the groin for any reason, but rather the subtle groin which is above the veins.
And in this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens the cord of the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
And then take care to cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 20.
On the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears that the space in the cord of the testicles is empty, in which case there are two testicles figured like a female's, and they are felt.
And sometimes moisture appears from that place where urine is in the cord of the testicles.
Moreover in women it is a species: and it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is thus like two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all dimensions, and it is divided into two parts thus like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two in men and of one species in women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted flesh into the wound so that it expels the pus of that, and then you cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men, in which urine is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 21.
On Abortion and Eminent Flesh Caused by Women.
Abortion is strongly adjusted by natural causes until it is stopped and it is done with regard; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads thus like in men and pervades until the coitus.
Therefore it is necessary that you hold the redundancy of abortion with your hand or with a hook and insert.
And do not delay in inserting, rather in the region of the womb, so that there is no efflux of blood.
And then cure it with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Moreover, born flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is situated in the parts before according to the semblance of a snake (and for this reason some first call it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we insert thus like inserting abortion, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the Cure of Gout.
Gout is when the womb of the woman is not perforated, or is the small passage. It is either a natural or accidental condition.
The accident is due to a bad mixture that has preceded it, and this is caused by poorly adjusted flesh or subtle and sparse blood.
It is made in the prison of the matrix, or in its ribs, or in the upper pus of it, or in the lower pus of it, and prohibits quietude and pregnancy and childhood, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the recognition of it is made by observation of the uterus, if the obstacle is apparent, propitiate; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with the ties of the fingers or at the radius.
But if the obstacle is due to subtle blood, and it is propelled to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt it.
And it stops over the two labial pustules, and then you pause with the fingers of both hands to indicate the worst symptoms.
And the woman lies on her back, her thighs extended, and then you extend the two lips inward so that the subtle blood is ruptured and the obstacle is opened.
And then take a lantern and anoint the oil on it, and place it over the area, and leave it there for a day so that the affected area is not consolidated.
But if the blood is thick and sparse, then you need to inject that with a wide spatula or a full spoon of myrtle.
But if the obstacle is due to flesh, then suspend it with an onion, and inject that.
And there are the medicines that stop the flow of bloody wounds, such as achaetia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted with album of wolf's [bile].
And then administer a wide ampulla of lead plaster so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
And hold it for several days and administer lukewarm water of dry wine.
And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And some old wisdom is hidden in the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary to inject according to this method. But if it is for cancerous apostemes, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix not made contrary with iron in any method.
Chapter 83.
On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that are hidden in the confines of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins until those corrode blood continuously; and how antiquated hemorrhoids are and are made tails.
And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the prison of the matrix and do not appear to the senses, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
But those that are in the orifice of the matrix above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail into the furrows, or with sharp drag, and inject that into the roots.
And then powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the pulverizing powders that stop wounds, such as achaetia and similar to those.
And then soften the soles of the feet for an hour, and then place it in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and of scorches of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and mix that with honey and wine and make an emplaster with water over the back of it.
And if the blood is abscessed, good; and if not, make adhere to two vents, and to the nipples with scarification.
And then take a lantern and submerge it in the juice of colyander or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
And cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 84.
On the perforation of accidental hernia in the matrix.
Many species of apostemes are hidden in the matrix, such as cancer and lapident aposteme and ulcers and adherent and erupting and fistulous hemorrhoids and raguarrhias and thyl and other apostemes. And I have already said about these bad mixtures and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means: Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means: Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
Then I think the text means:
And then you should insert the measuring rod between the patient's fingers to feel if there is any warmth or moisture in it. Press the woman's belly inward so that she can breathe deeply into her womb.
But if she does not breathe, then it is necessary that the woman be treated with poultices of thyme and fenugreek on her abdomen.
And then command her to take a deep breath, and then compress her abdomen, so that it may stir up the condition; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, because the womb will be purified as much as possible.
And if the two wombs are completely purified at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them to fertility little by little. But if she does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet above hers, and then place the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the wombs are not properly turned and the womb dies, then cut into them and extract the contents of the womb or tie it to her arm with a bandage and extract that which is equal, because it will be purified.
When the womb settles on the soles of the feet, then it is necessary that you impel them upwards, and then convert the womb to a small one, and then that it swallows it, and then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
But when they are settled within the thighs, then you command her to exert herself, and make that external movement in condition, because it will be purified if God wills it.
And if it is not purified in what we have recommended, then you return the womb to its natural figure little by little, so that it will be purified later with a lighter movement.
And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altaea and dissolved gum, and pound everything well in the mortar for good percussion, and then smear it on the womb of the woman, below her belly. And then make that poultice into a warm bath, until you obtain the desired effects.
And when the parts below her are softened, then make a subtle fumigation of myrtle and subtly pause it on her. And when you have done the subtle fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make that stirring and close her mouth, and lift it from there, and press the lower part of her belly with a lighter compression, because the womb will be purified as much as possible.
Movement of the womb laterally during one of her hands. It is ingeniously reduced in the hand of hers, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with a strong concussion, and then administer gentle treatments with the recommended poultices.
And if the inflammation has come, then make her sit on a chair, and then study the reduction of her hand, and swallow the womb according to its natural figure, and make the woman stir and command her to compress herself until it is purified.
Movement of the womb on the expanded colon, with her hands and the surface of her belly towards her mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the womb and then revolves it little by little, and that which facilitates it.
And when it is thus and as much as it is swallowed, then stop on the womb of hers that we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then command her to swallow little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to incline herself on the right side, and then command her to compress herself; and make that stirring in condition. A prepared fetus lies on its side.
When you examine a horrible wound on the mother according to this method, consider, and then you insert your finger into the uterus to evacuate the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck, then you insert that of the naval, so it is not retained and dies.
And then you push the fetus into the birth channels until it pauses according to what is covered, and command the woman to take some gentle pushes, and the surgeon will be ready for the delivery, if God wills it.
The departure of twins or a multiple birth. You know that many twins are born weak, and some are not nourished for three or four months, but that is strange and difficult to understand; but I know the causes of abnormal nature, and it's not alive.
And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those umbilical cords. Some are born naturally, and some are born through unnatural means, and thus some are born naturally, while others are born through unnatural and unlawful means, just as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult cases of their birth and conception, and you arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you cure them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what makes it easy and subtle, and delays, and is ingenious according to the whole figure, just as it is prepared by the engendering in order to bring health.
The remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some wounds are formed in the hand one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman who has aborted does not get it, and another one with all forms, which causes false points for measuring the wise glorious savers.
And all that is covered in the science of the midwife, because it is strong enough to help that small being, and therefore I stop here as I have said.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it's not before existed, and you are forced to use opposing operation on the mother, then it is good to consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not at risk of accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Then it is good that the woman should be placed on a mattress on her back with her legs elevated, and her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs should be raised.
And the minister holds that of two parts or is bound to the mattress so that the body of the woman does not extend itself during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you humidify the mouth of the mother with oils and with mucus from the altar and from fenugreek and from sesame seeds.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand into the mother, and then seeks the place where the fingers are on the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to come out onto the back of the head, and then you place your fingers on its heels, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or below the beard, or in its armpit, or in the convenient places of its ribs, or below the hypochondries.
Moreover, if the delivery is over the feet of the fetus, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is good to hold the finger on the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand facilitated and place the finger in some of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause of the birth.
And then pause and place another finger in opposition to it, or the third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its own rectitude alone.
And thus it is all divided, so that the delivery of it may be alleviated just as it is done in tooth extraction, with the eradication of it.
And it is good in that which is between them that the extension may be mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is good that the midwife anoints her fingers with oil and inserts them expertly and revolves them in that which is retained.
Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers are permitted to enter the place where it was put out; and do thus until all of the fetus is delivered.
If the hand is ossified within the other, and it's not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of the muscles, then it's necessary that the dressing be enveloped around it; and then extract it so that the whole thing is forgotten, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And thus it's necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
If the head of the foot is large, or if it's constricted in the ossification, or if it's in the head of the adjusted water, then it's necessary to introduce between the toes spatula-shaped spines and break the head and extract the water, or that which discards this with an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is about to come.
And similarly, it makes sense if the foot is naturally large-headed: and then it's necessary to insert that with an alkaline substance, or to take that with an alundum as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is ossified and constricted towards the ankle, then it's necessary to be opened until the humidity which is in the foot is released.
If it's not complicated, nor ossified, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
And if the intestines of the belly are apostemated or are in a hydropic state, then it's necessary to perforate that until the humidity that is in them is drained.
If the feet are upon the six toes, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the matrix is lighter.
If it's constricted towards the belly and the foot, then it's necessary that you extract that with a dressing which you will have enveloped around your hand, and that you open the belly and the foot until what is in them flows out.
If the other members are numb and turned towards the head, then the measuring instrument is introduced into the left hand; if the mouth of the matrix is opened, then introduce the hand into the opening of the instrument, and seek out that with the head, and direct it towards the toes until it reaches the mouth of the matrix, and then introduce it into one or two inches, and direct it towards those.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted due to apostema, which contracts towards the ulcer, then it's necessary that you don't touch it; instead, it's necessary to administer an infusion of humid, fatty substances. And apply plaster; and follow the patient with remedies that mollify and humidify.
And if the foot is on the sixth rib, then if it's possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the previous foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
And it's necessary that you don't leave any cause of the second inflammation.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the ulcers that contract towards the matrix.
And if it contracts with a flow of blood, then apply styptic remedies and administer another cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom it was said that she was dead, and then on that same spot another conceived embryo, and then the dead foot is another. It happens to him that for a long time an ulceration occurred in the sixth embryo; and it swelled until it became a swollen belly, and began to take on a crooked shape.
And I was called to his cure, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague is not consolidated.
Then I paused regarding him about some causes of emplastered strong attraction, and ossified one bone, and then passed several days, and ossified another bone; and I was too marvelously surprised, as if there were no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead foot.
Then I understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the six thousand disposed milieux, and I saw her in such a manner for a long time, correcting one little crooked shape.
And I didn't find it strange, but rather that it's science and help to what the artificial hand does in the cure by administering.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Form of a vertex in which the matrix is opened.
This is the form of a stretcher in which the books are bound, to which binding two vertices are on both extremities of two feet. I command that this vertex be made more subtle than the stretcher, and be made of ebony or boxwood.
And let the latitude of each wood be two fingers and a margin of each one wood be one finger, and the longitude of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two woods there are two adjustments of those same woods which were already fixed, of which the longitude is a palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And you should give two additional ingredients that are inserted into the mouth of the mother ( uterus ) so that it is opened when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Another form appears similar to this, but more subtle and more languid:
It is made from the juice of ivy or of boxwood according to the similarity of forces. Moreover, in the extremity of his body there are two additional aids, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then you make the woman sit on a sheet with her feet pendant, opening what is between her thighs. And then you open your hand with the instrument, thus making a forceps-like grip according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the womb, until the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of virtue which the ancients described:
Form of thrusting in which the fetus is thrust out:
Form of assisting in which the head is constricted grandly
And it is assembled like a forceps which bites into the extremity, thus many times, and some veins are made long thus like forceps according to this form, thus many times, which bites thus like the bite of reservation in which it is incised and constricted. Form of assisting little by little:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities at which the head is separated:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when I multiply the species of that and prepare them for the artisans, it is easier to operate on them and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
And do not work with those instruments that are not suitable for you to handle, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
About the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained due to the infant's effort, then you command the midwife to retain it there, and then make that stirring in condition, and stretch your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if by so doing it is delivered easily, good.
And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the covering a hole and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the womb, thus with calamine and rough and anet and chamomile and sicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that over the font.
And then pause a cane tube in the mouth of the womb, and hold that until the vapor comes to the concavity of the womb.
And then make that stirring as I have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with velocity.
Moreover, if this cure is not effective, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sisami or in a mixture of other herbs, and then insert that into the vagina and seek out the afterbirth with it, and when you have found it, take it out little by little. If it is attached to the womb, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have felt the afterbirth, extract it slowly so that the womb does not collapse from the vehement attraction. Beforehand, make sure that the right and left sides are exchanged to facilitate.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have not recommended the cure with stirring and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Moreover, if it is not expelled for all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is certain that what is ejected from it at the mouth of the womb lies in the thigh of the woman, and then crystallize that in injection and tetrapharmacon; because that will make it dissolve and be expelled after some days.
Moreover, when it is ejected, it is elevated as a bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that leads the midwife to administer sub-fumigations and convenient things to that.
Moreover, some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitrite and dry figs.
Form of instrument in which the woman is fumigated from the retention of menses and of the afterbirth:
It is made from glass or from copper.
The extremity is placed subtly in the container and the larger extremity is placed above the fire, and the subtle fumigation is placed above the arms of the fire.
You hold that thing in which the subtle fumigation is consumed, and you iterate another one.
From the care of the infant's unperforated buttock.
Many infants are born with their buttocks not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed anus. Then advise the midwife to perforate it with that finger; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
And place a poultice over that infant's swollen vein, and take care of that limb until it is healthy.
If you fear it is obstructed, then place a cannula in the tract for many days, and wait until the infant will be able to expel.
And you hasten the obstruction of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; then advise that this consolidation be incised, and take care to be cured with what we have said about the cure and the poultice.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur below the perineum are usually low and narrow, and those that occur near the anus or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that node is old and corroded by the acidic white humidity or subtle pus, and some veins are derived from these fistulas, some penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known for what is ejected from them through the outlet and through ventilation; and some veins use the badness of outlet, and therefore they are ejected from those worms.
And from those fistulas some veins are derived in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and from those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
And that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating, is that you put your finger in the anus, and you feel a subtle thread of iron or of ferrum in the fistula when it is not twisted.
If it is twisted, then you insert into that subtle thread of lead or of horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progression of the tract nor any cause of evacuation nor worm nor ventilation, thus as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it until the place where medicine is consolidated.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread is perceived entering here if it is not twisted into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the part; and that sometimes it produces pus; and that it does not work with that medicine, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is troublesome and vain effort by foolish doctors over which they boast.
If it is not penetrating and not old, health may be hoped for with iron treatment, as I have recommended to you, and that which has already been done and proposed.
And it is that the badness goes between your hands over the two fingers and raises the arms of it towards them, the thighs are inclined towards its belly, and then you insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the twisted fistula, until you feel the place where the thread is perceived.
And if it feels the badness around the neck, then advise that you insert your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel with your finger the thread that has already been discovered to penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that siphus or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not trouble yourself about it, because there is no health in it, thus as we have said.
Perhaps some emperors said that some are healthy in some harsh homes.
And from the medicine by which youth is hoped for in it, that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously stated, and you insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then you iterate those two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh fistulas which seem like a feather of a bird's wing are fully healed.
And then you care for that with warm wraps enveloped in cloth until they can heal all those adjusted flesh, and then you care for that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
If you insert a tube inside and it doesn't penetrate into the tissue where it is in the colon, and between that and the tube which is merely a fleshy or cartilaginous part, and sometimes the fistula forms on the surface of the codena, then cauterize the codena from the commencement of the fistula, and you will see that the tube is cauterized, and it is inside the fistula until the cauterization pervades to the place where it touches the extremity of the tube, and by the tube it is freed and healed.
And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are assembled around the painful canal of the anus and do not rupture them for any reason.
Maybe it is necessary to cleanse the wounds several times until they come between you and your operation when you insert them, then the thousandth time it will be of the pus-less instrument to cauterize with fire or medicine acute, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good habits: so it is an adjustment of those adjusted wounds, and excision of the sanious exudation from the humidities.
And then treat those wrapped ulcers in bandages or in causes that are settled in the location until it gets better, and then treat the plague with a hard, lasting, and consolidating medicine.
And these are the medicines that are stipulated and excised; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not have relapses.
Maybe the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum of the colon and is elongated from the surface of the body, then enter the tissue said in the colon and investigate there.
And so if you feel the tube and it is merely cartilaginous or fleshy, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it unless according to a way of trust and hope.
This cause is to administer in one of three ways: either cauterize that thus as we have said; or you cut into it until you reach the cavity of the intestine so that it is possible for you to enter the fistula and the propounded cure; and do not process too much with the cutting so that you do not incise the containing layer of the intestine, and you ascend over the patient's thigh with a gentle movement, as is your will; or you elongate that fleshy part and remove that pus which cuts into it towards the colon, thus as we have said, either with a tube or another instrument of acute extremity, and cleanse those fistulated wounds which are in the cutting into the oneness of the crustation; and strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the cutting, and if the horrible pus does not consolidate, and ruptures the herniated fistula in the part of the colon, and it will be less painful for the patient. And the fistula is finally finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tube into the fistula, and it is in the region of the colon around the surface of the body at the codena and in the margin of the colon, then take the tube of perforated extremity, which is thus like a prepared needle, preparing the flanks according to this form.
and enter into that wrapped file of five files or around those; and then enter the tube into the file in the fistula until you reach the cavity of it.
Maybe it is penetrating into the margin of the colon quite deeply, then you extract the file from that tract thus that you insert the tissue said in the colon; and you remove the extremity of the file and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when maybe you incise the file into the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh are incised which are between the two extremities of the file and fall.
And then treat the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Maybe the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not too much in the perineum, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not incise the containing layer; and then make it enter until it is healed.
The form of the spatula is like this which is bent to meet the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that you do not incise what is not necessary, thus sometimes.
About stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are thus according to two methods, because either they are between the colon resembling a carbuncle, or those are like a fat of radish. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from those sometimes and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the colon, and in the extremities of it.
Maybe those that are outside the colon are according to the measurements of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous cos, and thus according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is deeply in the colon is that you command the patient to sit down and to exert themselves until the colon is evacuated and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you should cut and suspend an inch above where you hold those in your finger, and then insert them into their roots.
Perhaps the nails are not held in those for their humidity and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a cotton thread or a lanolin dressing, and extract those from the fingers, and then insert them into powdered caustic powders to prevent burning; or cauterize those according to what is written in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal those with another cure until they are completely healthy.
And if the anus does not obey the excretion, then crystallize the patient in a crystal container where it is slightly bitter, and wash them with that water which is in the bowel and helps to facilitate excretion more easily when the patient is prepared.
Perhaps the hemorrhoids are blocking the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take those with your finger, or take those with an inch, and insert them, and then heal those with water that we have said until they are completely healthy.
And to those who have undergone incision, it is necessary to administer sutures according to this method: take a threaded needle and insert it into the hollow of the aguja, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make that penetrate into the hollow of the other part, and envelop the two extreme threads of the needle around the part below the aguja, and thus latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then knot the thread and extract the aguja.
And make that into a whole, and leave one of those open and not sewn, so that the superfluity of blood can flow from that.
And then place a dressing over the anus, either infused with rose oil or cerate; and place that over the bowel and command the patient to rest. And then leave that until it crusts; and when it falls off, heal those with an ointment or another cure until they are healthy.
And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, it is necessary to root them out with the point of a spatula or with your finger until they are made humid and held back by the scab that forms beneath, which prevents their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then you remove them with a violent root out, more vigorously at first until no blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are completely healthy.
You know that wounds, that is clear, and it is not so unless you notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is made throughout the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends with those pains that give the annoyance.
And then it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the wound be incised, and held with forceps or an inch, and eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
And if you want, cauterize the following as written in the seventh chapter.
Perhaps a wart is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and soft moles come on the hands of children.
And the cure of it is to stretch and insert that, or to strengthen that with a thread or a hair until it crusts. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
Perhaps an anthill is a small, rough, fistula-like growth on the surface of the body next to the elbow, and when it touches that, it becomes centred in the likeness of morbid formation of anthills, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is to take a hollow cane of elder tree or of voltor, and make it strong, and place that over the anthill until it contains the circle of the cane around its parts; and then revolve your hand with the cane until you insert what is in the circuit of the anthill, and pause that in the elbow of the flesh, and eradicate the anthill from its root.
And if you want, make that with a cane of iron or copper according to this form:
The part below the cane holder is subtle, solid (it is not perforated), enveloped so that above it the grasp of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the anthill according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterizing of atheyl.
In the manner of the instruments that are administered to give consolation.
Some medications are made of silver or gold or copper or tin alloy; and some medications are made of those small and large instruments according to the ones that are administered, because what is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose veins are fragile or delicate, the medications of those should be small.
The form of large and few medications:
The head of the tube from underneath which is tied to the bag should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distant from where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
And the extremity of the tube from below, which is inserted into the vein, should be smooth (not rough) like a lion, subtly entering; and on one side of the tube there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the size of the roots and thus a small one becomes bigger.
And the bag in which are placed the medications of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and its size should be a palm.
And it should be pierced for many channels thus as it is revolving; and if the space which is between the channels is very large.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fiber, or around those; and adjust it to the bag; and when it is placed in the bag, it should be tightened at the head of the medication between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then medicate through each channel: The quality of medicating through that channel is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and lift their legs up high and place one roll above them where the veins are or a lancet; and then apply the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the vein to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it twice or three times until it is evacuated from the intestine as much as is in the medication; and then remove the medication and the patient lifts their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces that out of the sediment, hold it as much as you can; and if it sleeps through the whole night, it is better for its recovery.
Better if you medicate that in the illnesses of dissolution of stomach and sedimentation of the gut, then you iterate the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the vein there are emorrhoids or painful apostems, then the medication should be subtle and gentle, among the medications which children are usually medicated with.
About the treatment of wounds.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with mother and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place on which they occur.
And the causes why many wounds are made are thus like a blow of stone, or incision of space or of cutting, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a sagitta, or similar to those of many causes.
Better the wounds that are in the places of the body thus like a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of the composed parts will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when there are simple head wounds and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's from a blow of stone or similar, and you have already cleaned the wound as much as possible and it's a great wound and you fear about that patient having an aposteme caut, then you should cauterize and phlebotomize the cephalic vein immediately, and don't delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is little.
And it should be phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of wine and of gross vintages.
Better if from the minor prohibition some cause is forbidden, then it should be diminished of wine and not approached to flesh nor to wine.
And pause on the wound, if it has an aposteme caut, cut off the inflamed part with oil of rose or in wine in which it is stipulated.
It is certain to remove the putrid pus from the wound, then stop above the plague, if it recently sits in the holy seat and the air has not changed that powder which you recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed that powder, then stop above the swollen gums until it is healed.
If the wound is large or is due to infection of the space and similarity, and its lips are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them in a suture according to what you recommend for the suture of theirs.
If the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it does not retain its own except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply proper care to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of the cartilage, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is grossness: cabbage and fermented fish and similarity to theirs, until it is composed.
And if you find rotten decay in the cartilage and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that putrid matter and remove it, and apply proper care to that.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows holy blood that may come, and it is not separated by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it unseparated, then cut out that with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, provoke what we have said does not conflict, then cauterize until the blood is separated.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of theirs is light; similarly, you powder over them with this powder, because consolidated in that manner, so that the air does not change them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, holy dragon's blood two parts, unextinguished fire three parts; crush everything thoroughly and crumble it, and fill the wound with it, and constrict it with good constriction until it be on that scar, and coagulate it with the holy blood.
And then strengthen that from below with pules and lift it, and do not dislodge it while it is thus that it is not putrid, because it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healed.
And some old wise men make that sole remedy, when there is not in your presence iris and holy dragon's blood.
And already make this moderate operation in great wounds when it is convenient to stop above them and they are strengthened, and thus recent wounds with their holy blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then do not intend to apply this powder, but rather take care of those with what we have said, similarly that you stop above those swollen gums digesting, or that you stop above those pores of the flour of the ordinary water and honey until they get purification; and apply proper care to them with another cure until they are healed.
If you encounter a fracture wound in the bone, and it is small, then extract that with gestures.
And you will direct the cure of fractures of the head in what is incoming.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the wound occurs on the neck, then it is not in the difference of medicine, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the engendering but that the cure of it should be avoided with what makes vehement stipulation, similarly as ziniar and zegi that it is vetriol and similar to theirs because noxious to the nerves and contradicting that. And do not stop above the wound for any cause of total freshness, because the substance of the nerves is fresh and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
And if that is cured by light medicines, similarly as it is caused by washing with warm water, some veiled infusion in rose oil or non-rose oil, and thus when it is washed with warm water and other minor wounds are treated according to this manner, and swollen humors.
If the wound is large, then administer suture, or bind its lips, and apply proper care to it with pules until it is healed.
If the wound is deep or occurs in the part below the pus, then pierce that at the place most prone to putridity.
If in the wound an artery is cut and a flow of blood occurs, then separate or dry that, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke to that.
If you have cut the vertebrae of the throat or all, and thus saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the cartilage with suture over the cane of the throat and do not touch that; meanwhile equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with decent structure, and lift it for some days; and apply proper care to it in swollen gums where there is stipulation and excitement until it is healed.
If the plague has already infected the bone to make an ulcer, then percuss there, and if there is a fragment of bone, extract all that you can from it; and what you have not prepared, let it be inserted again so that the plague does not spread, and separate and clean the affected area.
And if the plague is recent, then powder over it with the powder that you have recommended. If the plague has made a fistula, then cure it with what you have learned from memory, which will come back to you in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of the lance or of the cutting, and sometimes of its depth, then consider that if the plague has taken possession of the patient's body, then you know that the plague is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the seventh wound, then you pause on it at the first hour with powder, and do not stretch out for which the wound is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and waters the patient, rather pause on it with attractive ointments, and remove those two evil humors during the day.
And if the ointment is not present to you, then pause on the orrifici of the plague, cutting very well so that it sucks out what is of the humors; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it corrects what is in him.
If you have passed three days or more of the plague and it does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and sometimes the other good dispositions of him, then you know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with warm remedies and the other curative treatments until it is healed.
If the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time is opened, then you know that a fistula has been made; therefore cure it according to the seventh chapter.
And if the plague is by incision of the scapula or of the cutting, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with what is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If you have made an ulcer in the bone, and you have already cut into it with pincers, then twist the plague and try to extract those pincers, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then let them enter so that the plague does not spread, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other plagues occurring in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
Of the ulcers of the belly.
The indisposition which affects the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introgression of them at the seventh place, because it opens and becomes gross due to the instrument of him being made difficult.
And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that converge in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other plagues, but above all, they are proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Then I say that when the plague is small and it is caused by some intestine problem for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has received inflammation from the coldness of the air.
And therefore when it is so, then you should scald that in this way that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embroques with that into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And some ulcerations do this, where it has stipulated, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you humidify the intestine with water in which there are caught altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of him is alleviated with little cause.
If the instrument of him is excavated to this cure, then you separate the disruption with a small instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
And the first treatment is better when it is properly done so that it doesn't become necessary to occupy and relieve through failure.
Take away the instrument, see if it's in its proper form:
One part of the sharp twisting, and another non-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of a spatula, unless it becomes obtuse at a point.
And thus when the plague is amplified and goes beyond the intestine, then it's necessary that its reduction follows the natural form, in its proper place, if possible, because better is.
Moreover when the disruption is great, and it's in the lower part of the belly, then it's necessary that you place the patient on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the belly, then you stop the head of the patient and their chest higher than the lower parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should direct your attention and consideration always to this, so that the part where the plague is may be higher than the other.
And thus it's necessary that you administer this in severe plagues and in moderate ones.
And in small plagues, stop that which is prepared for you, and make sure that the minister is between your fingers, which holds the entire disruption under its hand and adjusts its lips, and uncover from that to whoever knows the suture of some cause or another.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts the threads according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then you pass through the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the thread once, so that you don't put faith in both ends of the code, both ends of the ciphac which is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added both ends of the code and both ends of the ciphac, and thus you form four orders.
And then you strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some divisions of both parts at the same time, and then you add both lips to the plague for decent addition; and then you pass through the grossness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then you tie it with double faith as you did with the first needle; and do not cease from doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you complete all the constriction of the plague.
And thus the moderate needles are between grossness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move more gently into the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entry into the code, and therefore it's necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and grossness.
And it's not necessary that the needle be fixed in both ends of the code properly, so that the flesh is not gently wounded and that the plague does not heal before its consolidation.
And there are no prolonged sutures because the plague should not be prohibited from consolidation.
And then you insert the ends of the needles so that they do not touch the patient's bed; and you sprinkle powder over the suture, expanding it throughout the entire part, which holds the ends of the needles; and thus you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles are more convenient in small plagues, because they have need of a suture of one needle or two or around those.
Moreover the second suture is communal: and it's that you administer a suture of the four ends, of the code and both ends of the ciphac, in one way, with a needle in which faith is involved in subtlety and grossness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle from that same part where it began, so that the faith retreats and draws back the inferior part of the plague, so that the suture is according to the suture of a drawstring in which the threads are strengthened.
And stop between each suture the quantity of the grossness of the lesser finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And in such a suture I have healed the plague that had afflicted a man in his belly, which was wounded in a wound, and it was the disruption of the greatest plague of one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the intestine in the middle place and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have reduced it from the time when the intestine had been outside the plague for 23 hours.
And the plague was consolidated in a space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I saw him for many years, and he conversed about his dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healthy; and by a miracle it was done, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because he was in a place where no ointment was of use nor any medicine, but rather stopped over the plague many times a day and abluted assiduously with honey water until he was healthy.
There are two species of proper sutures according to the narrative of Pareula.
And it is that you begin with a suture of the knee, and you insert a needle from the front part to the back part.
And thus as the needle penetrates into the knee and in that moment the blood flows according to the rectitude and in the length of the whole body, and there is the extremity of the scaphoid bone where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part, on the other side of the midsection.
And thus when you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the midsection from the front part to the back part; and there is the extremity of the scaphoid bone which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate there your penetration, which you do in the scaphoid bone in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of the inner thigh so that all that penetrates.
And then begin from this side of the ribcage and remove that from the extremity which is of the scaphoid bone on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the knee which penetrated, and then return it to the knee and thus the extremity of the scaphoid bone which is on the other side in this mirror's extremity; and withdraw it from the knee which is part of it.
And do this one time and another, and do this one time then another time until you collect all that which is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you collect a suture of pellicles in which you collect the skin, thus that you collect the scaphoid bone one time from the part of the extremity of the knee, and that you leave another time until it is complete.
Moreover, the second species of proper suturing, which is called Gualia's method, and this is to be done by the serum of it and for its recommendation, is that you collect it according to similarity in which you add all parts to their comparable part conveniently by nature; and apply one extremity to another extremity of the mirror to another extremity of it, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
It is fitting that you hold the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your propitious moment of the front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that soil, and leave two extremities of the scaphoid bone; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the scaphoid bone.
And then revolve those circles, and make penetrate some circles of the back part until to the front part in two extremities of the mirror on the other side which are not in the contrary side.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common ligature, and it is a suturing of which I previously mentioned the remembrance.
This is Gualia's serum.
And more, the dissector says, a ventral suture is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these some threads, and begin with an introduction of a needle from what is your duty, and make it penetrate until the other side according to the suturing of those who collect the galls in engagement.
And it is known that when disruption is in the middle place of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen.
The judgment of medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you congregate the recent plague with the holy blessed blood of the Lord, then the air alters that, and reduces the intestine and collects it and adapts it decently, then pauses over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that alcus gathering those who are present until they make strong and hard skin, and thus consolidate scaphoid bone and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the curing of other plagues until it is sanctified.
Moreover, if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that so much, because it begins to get worse, much evil, and permutates those two ways of the day, thus as you and your teacher, until it is sanctified, because you do not need other medicine in many dispositional motives when the plagues are simple.
Moreover, if you fear that the plague communicates in the lesions of the principal members, then it is fitting that you submerge the lanolin oil of tempered quality, or in rosated oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the axillas.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the holy intestines, because many ways that is intended, then crystallize that in vi stipptic black tea, and majorly if the powder is pervaded into the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
We know that what is of the large intestine is of more urgent healing than what is in the subtle intestines.
It is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gęgunu" does not receive healing from the plague that falls on it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and due to its magnitude that is in those, and due to the subtlety of the body of that, and due to the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
Perhaps what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and consequently receives that recent reduction, reduces it according to your correct treatment in which you reduce the intestines equally.
Perhaps it has passed to the space and already becomes yellow or black, then when you stretch it over the area that is denounced of it, so that bad fluxes of blood come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then insert what is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the partition below the plague foro it, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it deviates from the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the seven ventral parts with percussion of the lancet and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gesture and ventilation.
Therefore you should pursue the cure of it since it was not confused in its healing, perhaps you should subtly focus on entering that which sanitizes and consolidates the area.
And you put that you saw the area already consolidated, then look above the patient who falls above it because of the bad accident in the seven ventral parts; and do not fall into some bad accident and wounds in their many disposed milky mangling and being, and then enter in bath and is exercised in its digits.
And already I showed you some experimented things that when plague falls in the intestine, and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take threads from large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and pause a thread of those that has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of it and stretch its mouth, it separates the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another thread next to the first one, and do not stop until you make threads in another way according to the quantity of the entire plague.
And then return it and thus the plague; and reunite those heads annexed in the intestine until the intestine is sanitized; and do not allow any bad nourishment.
And already it is possible that the intestine is tied with subtle thread which is made from the intestine of annexed beast, since it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it is not very descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of the beast, enveloped, and then insert that thread into needles and thus in that intestine, and return it to the disruption.
And this manner of suturing with threads is not just according to the way of trust and hope.
Perhaps the plague is great and ample, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not generated except by subtlety, and there is no total healing of it.
Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
We know that every plague and aposteme when they become inflamed and ancient, it makes an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets worse over time and does not abscise, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we do not call it azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a painful, hardened, white nodule which does not hurt and is conquered thus as it is conquered by the pain of a bird; and therefore it is called a calcified knot, that is, pain.
And it is in some humid homes which gets worse; and strongly the humidity is abscised in some hours. And some vegetables from this humidity are soft, and they are few, and they are large, and they are subtle.
And I have shown you all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of their loves in medicine in the division.
And I will teach you how to know the cure of fistula, which is done by way of operation with hand.
And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give proximity to the principal member and likeness.
And therefore that among these fistulas which is according to this manner is of the evil diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas some depth that does not penetrate to these places that I have said, and you hope and confide in the cure of it, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you acquire it in the hand.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle probe of lead, because lead in the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Then crystallize the openings for their own openings, because the moisture by which you crystallize it goes away from the other openings and corrects their flow.
And you inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula at which many openings are above all that sums up your strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the evil, and the invention of the pain from your compression on the hand over the place, and likeness of the signs and accidental causes to the aposteme.
And when you have stood over all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have and said.
Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the openings of the flesh, or of the heel and of likeness, and cure it within so that it may be healed.
But if the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is straight, then you should cut into that in the preceding part as much as possible, and then mundify that of all its corrupt flesh; and then administer some enveloped medicaments acutely, and introduce them within to the conquest of the fistula, which has been comprehended in iron.
And do that among those some evacuated within so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which remains in the conquest of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it among those who engender healthy flesh within so that it may be healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is certified by you, then you should inquire into that and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that within so that the corruption may be held entirely; and then cure it among those who incarnate within so that it may be sanctified.
And if it is not healthy and gives trouble as it did, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover again secondarily and exquisitely the reason of it and the mundification of it with the last fortaleza tieua, and then restore it.
And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the long-standing profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and then in that you do not generate but rather leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract it, then you attract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those you will not leave any cause in your strength.
But if you have made contrary to some cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and extract the bones.
But if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause on the plague that you can hardly touch the plague there, and let it enter so that it is around the bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and be constricted in the section which you have inserted in your operation.
Having, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone above the three olive oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian vinegar, or in the juice of green olives, because when those ligaments are purified, and the bones are separated from their abstraction, and those attractions are alleviated.
But if it is a large bone thus with the bone of leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so alone, then cut away that bad and corrupt part entirely so that it is stopped, and then restore the plague.
But if that which of it is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and totally insert into the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you send someone to a house with his thigh so that he pauses there for some time and helps above your operation.
Put a young man of around thirty years old, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the affected parts it is evident that the matter is above the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of abscess in a great abscess, and do not put it down to an external cause.
And then you will extend the time in that error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and correct the matters that are moved, and its cure will be paused until the leg becomes fistula, and make points in the orrificis motes which all get purulence and humidity of the body.
And then the multitudinous doctors around two years, and do not put faith in those wise men except in the art, until you were called.
And I saw the leg of that man and the matters that were running from that orrificis for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
And then I introduced a probe into one of those orrificis and penetrated the probe to the bone.
And then I probed and examined all the orrificis and tried to penetrate to their origin in all parts of the leg.
And then I cut and dissected above one of those orrificis until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I cleared away what was discovered by me and prepared the bone that was uncovered.
And I judged that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had cut away and cleared, and I had already destroyed.
And then I paused the restoration of the plague with medicine consolidatives for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered above the bone secondarily above the primary discovery, and I found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I cleared away what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I did perforate to make the cure of it and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then I discovered about the other way and did not cease to insert into the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, but it is not restored until I inserted around a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated gradually and healthy.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of the fragility of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens at all hours by superfluity of evacuation in syncopic evil.
And thus it is healthy through entire sanity, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in the whole body and returned its virtue; and it is converted into its dispositions and did not make opposition in walking nor harm in any cause.
But if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already troubled, then cover that you seize it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it in the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend to its own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it above the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that it attracts the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place which you want to saw so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
And stop putting a tablecloth underneath them, because when you do that it's not prohibited to serrate the corrupted flesh.
And cover the serrated area over the small corrupted part little by little, because if it's in the cavity of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear in its appearance to the sense, and strengthen the serration of the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it's one continuous part in the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and stop putting a tablecloth underneath, and stop serrating that of the first part where the corruption enters until the serration of the other part is continued.
And make the serration according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and serrate the bone where it's connected to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then it's not in the reason but in the ingrown.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it's very difficult; however cover that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and take hold of that, and remove that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and make an effort so that everything is rectified for you, when not doing contrariety comes to you or nervousness.
And you know that the incisors and the serrations are suitable for incising those bones according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and their smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of operational instruments convenient for that operation.
And you know that this operation means to you about the kind of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience with the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of illnesses, because then you would have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for each illness according to the instruments.
And you will form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simple as those which proceed to your prohibition which you will experience about the others. Method of serration:
Method of another serration:
Method of another large serration:
Method of a groove: Make the head of this groove according to the form of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the pointed alfefeigi.
And it's not convenient unless you confide in that groove the heads of the joints when they're corrupted, or it's a large and wide mouth.
Method of the minor razor:
Method of the wide razor:
Method of another serration done properly: it is made with an arched piece of iron above and the sharpness of the iron, and the member of the iron of boys is properly descended. Method of it:
Method of the razor in which there is a cavity:
Method of another subtle razor:
Method of another razor with a curved extremity:
Method of a small razor resembling a probe:
Method of another minor incisor:
Method of another incisor; this resembles a groove, and the extremity of it is like a serration, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Method of a groove that suits the ratio of that which is perforated in the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it's made of Indian iron, and similarly you know that all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and serrations.
Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with a cure of those medicines and the cure doesn't concur, or sometimes the corruption wanders to the member which doesn't perceive any cause, then it's known that you incise that member until the honor reaches the corruption, so that the evil may escape through death or major defect of the member.
And the sign of that which happens to him, is that the member becomes black until it's seen that fire has already burned, or it's weakened near the blackness until the weakening reaches that member which is its own and takes all the body; and thus you will have incision of that.
And similarly, if it's a cause of corruption from poisonous causes, such as from scorpion sting or viper bite or from rue and similar things.
If the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you insert the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
Likewise, if it reaches the hand, then you insert that from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if you surround it, then insert the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond the elbow and surrounds the joint, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for the cure is a quantity of virtue.
Likewise, it happens to the foot when corruption surrounds the toe of the foot, then you insert that into one of the nostrils.
And if it takes hold on the edge of the foot, then you insert the whole foot. Maybe it penetrates into the tooth, then you insert the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
And the manner of inserting the limb or of cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part below where you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is discovered completely; and then it is inserted or cut.
And take care that there is a pad of linen cloths on all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's adjusted lesion and abscess are cautious.
Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the affected area strongly, or stop the bleeding with certain powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a ligament in a convenient way, and take care of that until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that you undertake to go to a man in the city who has had this same accident, which you and I have recommended, which is because it happened to him in the city foot with adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
And that corruption happens primarily in the city finger until it reaches the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself for such a method because he sees the cure coming to the limb with the violence of it that removes pain and adjustment of it, and inserts that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
A long time happened to him that same corruption in the finger of the hand indicated.
And then it came to me, and I perfectly performed the removal of that superfluity on the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of it; and it does not remove the superfluity and begins to go to the other finger until it begins in the hand.
And it appeared to me to insert the hand of it, and I did not want to do that expecting about the removal of that superfluity, and maybe you should fear the insertion of the hand of death, because the virtue of the patient was on the decline.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and inserted his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be an aid concerning that which is said about this illness, and that it may be significant for what is signified and according to what is operated.
About the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it bursts and perforates, and it is drained of its blood, and one remains at the place where it was like a vessel, and the cord that is above it like a subtle drain, and it does not reach a further corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or in the nerve or in the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Maybe sometimes the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in certain members, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that one inserts the entire cord like a spiral, and mainly when it is subtly drained and made like a drain, and it confirms that it does not adhere to the place for its corruption.
Maybe you hope that the cord adheres and that corruption does not achieve further consequences, and in the cord has passed with a gentle touch, then you cure that with cleansing.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then cleanse that with Egyptian medicinal oil which is of olive and vinegar and zinian receiving equal parts, and adjust them in a vessel, and place them over the fire until the medicine makes a noise and reaches a specific time for honey.
And then you take of the water that is necessary and dissolve it in warm water and honey; and cleanse the wound with it, and strengthen the orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that in precise measure; and do it for as many days as are needed until the wound is purified and the pus is removed.
And some vegetables are cleansed with warm water of cinder, when it is not present to you this medicine; and it is that you take the cinder of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse the wound until you confirm that the wound is healed at that time.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine nor the water of cinder, then cleanse the wound with warm water and honey, and mix zinc oxide three times, and cleanse the wound with warm water and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and the wax makes the wound adhere, and it is greater when the wax has overflowed with humidity and dryness.
And when you do some vegetables and you confirm that the wound is already healed, then cleanse the wound with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take from the juice of dyaphinicon and dissolve it in oil of rose and wax; or that you cleanse with some medicines and other juices that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on juices.
And if the orifice of the wound is narrow where the cannula of the syringe cannot be received, then you amplify it by inserting a small iron instrument little by little, and pause in the water enveloped in Egyptian juice or in basilicon juice until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you bring together the lips of the wound with suture and leave as much as possible in the quantity where the syringe is inserted.
And if the orifice of the wound where the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower place where it is in the arm so that the arm may flow until below, because when the arm is constricted at the beginning of the wound, the flesh will be engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the wound until around the lower parts of the pus, then you must prepare the member with preparation for which the arm flows freely according to what appears and that there is no retention of any cause in the arm.
Moreover, that which is above the orifice of the wound, which is removed at all hours so that you may see what is adjusted in it from the arm. And so that you know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And also you consider the place of that wound, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is gathered over the orifice of the wound already adheres, or it acquires adherence, then you may delay it for two or three days, and when you delay the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the juice.
Moreover, if the wound has a subtle and gentle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it is acquired, because some homes are in those where delayed generation of flesh occurs in those plagues, and of those that are done in those where the contrary of it is made.
And if the wound for many days is an indigested arm, then you know that the wound does not adhere; and if the adherence of the wound is delayed and it is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like Egyptian juice, when it is adjusted with an overflowing addition of zeigy.
And the last thing in what is cured, is that you take Egyptian juice and dissolve it in oil of rose, and place it on the veiled arm with its substance, and then confirm that it is good for him, and use it for him.
And thus it is similar in that action, when there is no arm, Egyptian juice, honey which is cooked until it is thickened, and use it for him; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle all over the honey which is on the focus, and then strengthen it over the cloth and hold it over the wound; and strengthen that honey which has been cooked until it is thickened, and sprinkle over the cloth and hold it.
And certain clarified remedies are to be administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and farina of errors and centaury, and use of those simple or adjusted, trituring them and powdering over the honey which has been recommended; and its juice.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the marrow of it, and already there has been inquiry into the bones or other hard members; then you will heal with a fistular cure, just as it has been said below.
About the cure of gouty hands and worn-out nails and incised fingers and severed sections.
Gouty hands are an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the hand or foot, and it grows in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less expected, or it is abscessed by a hot cautery, or it is corrupted, and it throws out a bitter humor that corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it pervades its corruption to the bone within, so that it has a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes dark.
And so when you have that water which we have spoken of in the division and it does not comply with your cure, then it is necessary to incise all the superfluous flesh that has grown from the nail and to cauterize the wound properly, because the cautery motion is not helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are already comprehending the flesh in the divided parts, and they begin to putrefy and lead to that, then it is necessary to make a subtle incision beneath the angle of the nail that puts flesh, and to impel it upon and incise that flesh to facilitate, and pause on what remains of the flesh of the corrosive medicines that consume until it is totally removed; and properly cure that wound so that it may be healed.
But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to incise the bone and extract it, because no time is wasted on healing what is corrupted in the bone.
And if the corrosion and corruption are going into the finger, then you incise it in one of the nodes according to the premise of its removal, and properly cure it so that it may be healed.
But if the nail has received percussion or attrition, and it is in that vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin by fleubotomizing the affected area, and properly cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument above just, and beware that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the affected painful area, and it will cause the nativity of the superfluous flesh adjusted in that place; and properly cure that place so that it ceases to give pain.
But that which is adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, is entirely flesh, and it is entirely in the bones, or it is entirely in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in certain nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not become evil, and that which is born in the joints is entirely evil.
And of those that are born fleshy, the cutting is lighter, and it is necessary to incise that from its root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so beware of its abscess.
But in that which is born on the fingers from the nodes, it is necessary to incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and properly saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and properly cure it so that it may be healed.
But consolidation occurs when it joins the fingers between their moved joints or by nativity of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of the wound or by combustion of fire, or by semblance; therefore it is necessary to cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And properly pause between the draps of the swollen fingers in rose oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate them from each other, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in certain fingers at the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of veins, they are variable.
Veins are variable, and they are enveloped by gross, full superfluous melancholic humors which come from the members of the body, and the major event of them is in the legs, and mainly in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary to administer purging of the body from black bile with certain clarified remedies for expulsion, and properly bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of iron in the blood is according to two methods: one is that it should be infused and attracted to remove black blood, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all blood should be extracted.
The sectioning of it is according to this method: at the beginning, apply a bandage to the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is purified by the leg, and then tightly bind the patient's thigh above the knee up to the area below the knee in one, two or three places, and then section the vein at one point, or two, or three points of wide sectioning, and then raise the black blood from the thigh above the area below the leg, and from there downwards, until the quantity of blood that you want is yielded and which has been wasted, and this tolerates the virtue of the patient.
And then leave it there, and order them to abstain from eating black bitter foods that generate choleric humor.
And continue the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is noticed to be beneficial to the patient.
The elevation of the blood is according to this method: you who raise the patient's leg, if it has many pores, and then put them in a bath and apply a warm bandage to the leg until it becomes red and the veins are extremely full; or it should be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you at present, until the member becomes scalded.
And then cut the skin on the right of the vein for sectioning in the loin or in the rear of the patient's back, or at the lowest part of the patient's back near the tailbone.
And then uncover the skin with an incision and scrape the vein from every part until it appears to sensation, and it is evident that the patient's appearance is declining towards blackness.
And then when you evacuate and remove the skin, you will see that white cord which was a string.
And then put it below the vein until it is raised and grafted onto the skin, and suspend it with a hook or iron lion.
And then cut another section, and then cut that section for three days, and then scrape the skin from the area below the vein until it appears.
And then raise it and insert it into the rear section of the back near the tailbone, and then extract it and raise it until it is yielded by the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And do it until you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is yielded; and then insert it.
And if you are not able to extract and raise it, then introduce a strong double-edged needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce the vein below and rotate your hand to every part until it is gathered. And beware that it is not inserted; for if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to raise it much and it will come back over the patient through that wound.
And when all the humors are purged, then pause over the place of the open wound with a mixture of vinegar and oil, both rosated and non-rosated, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is opposed and has twisted into the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then be careful to bind above that on every part of twisting of it and the places of envelopment of it, and then suspend it with an incision until it elevates everything.
And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that you do not plague it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; and preserve your prudence in that.
The form of the incident is what is called a sectional life:
It is not to be sharpened thus with hooks or it is not of sharp extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; but it has superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on cold lands, just as in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, which are hot and dry with little tenderness, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that goes below the skin, just as venomous snakes and worms and scarabs and worms are generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the signal of the suspicion of the advent of it is from this vein that causes inflammation vehemently in the leg; and then the place becomes vesicated; and then the vein begins to yield from the place of that vesication which seems to be rooted like a plant.
And then it appears from there the extremity, then cover that you envelop with a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachm, even to two drachms, and set that aside and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
And as many times as the eyes of the patient indicate some cause in the affected parts beforehand, wrap that in lead and let that hang. And if the motion is prolonged, then you inject a portion of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not inject that which is too thick until it is dissolved, for if you inject that it is contradictory and enters into the flesh and causes abscesses and putridity in the area and ulceration badly.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is freed from the back of the patient and no remainder of it remains in the body.
And from this vein, it is extracted in some men who are in their longitude of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have reached a point where I extract one of 20 palms.
And if it is injected at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the patient's tract and perforate that long tract in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefying medicine to the area for several days; and afterwards cure that by curing abscesses.
And in this vein, some times the joints are stiff, and especially when they appear at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and come to the most horrific orrifics, and it is extracted from some orrific ram.
And so cure that in this way as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
Of the section on generated worms under the skin, and it is called cow's disease.
This disease is named in some land as cow's disease because many times it develops in the oxen and it is a worm that is born between the gut and the flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, weakening and deforming, and it shows the sentiment of the sick animal member by member until it disintegrates the gut and eyes.
And its generation is due to putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing the accumulation of worms and serpents and limbrics and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the liver, then it strongly corrupts the liver and destroys it, and that develops many times.
And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you have the suitable ambulation and preparation of the patient's sentiment, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with bandages and strong constriction, and afterwards dry above it and extract it.
And if it is deeply rooted in the flesh and does not come out, then you pause with a cautery iron on the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh in which it corrupts the area as we have said.
Perhaps sometimes it happens that it reaches the head near the liver, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong stricture, and afterwards dry above it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use a mondification of the whole body with evacuating medicines for putrid bad humors, and beware of generating putrefaction.
Of the section on nafir disease.
This disease is named in our land as nafir, and it is pain that appears in certain members, and afterwards it spreads from member to member.
And now I have seen that according to what I recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been numb for an hour, I saw that inflammation going up as it went towards this, but more lightly than it should be, as if it were silver, I saw when it corroded from place to place.
And then I put myself in the pain of that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and afterwards I stayed there for an hour.
And afterwards I ran to the other body until I reached the other arm.
And afterwards I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what I saw; and it was too marvelous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And now I had seen nothing like that in my whelps according to that manner, however I have seen many of those which are born with pain being permuted from member to member. But I did not see that in the whelps as it was in the woman.
And I did not think it was that, but rather it was because the woman was old, with dried-up body and discovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permeated corruption.
And it is necessary that it not appear according to this retrogression in those who are delicate and have bodies with humiliated veins.
When you want to cure the patient, and they feel that pain, then it is not apparent to you in what way you should proceed, so you strengthen over that and let it be treated gently and slowly, entering that constricted area, and cauterize the affected spot.
Perhaps you do not see the hidden ulcers, then you cure that excess in the body and that which expels bad air, and burn those foul-smelling abscesses and those serpents like similar things.
From the extraction of juices.
Juices are diversified according to species, and according to the places in the body where they flow, because their diversity is that of those with large points, and small, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with asters.
And of the senses of the brain it is when you cut into the juice, and it transgresses the bone, and it is situated on the siphac which is above the brain, because it causes vehement headaches, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and it strongly absconds the speech and destroys the voice, and it is situated on the place of the plague with humid white blisters resembling pustules, and it seems to be affected by the similar flesh.
And then if you appear with those senses, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the juice, unless it is not outside.
Perhaps the senses of the juice when it cuts into the heart, so that it is near the adjacent breast, and it seems that it is fixed in a hard cause, and not a vain cause; and it strongly affects the movement of the juice, similar to the movement of the pulse, and it corrodes the black plague, and it is that coldness of the extremities, and it freezes the flesh, and syncopes; and then you know that death descends with all its might.
And the senses when the juice has infected the lung, so it is beset by bloody spumous matter of the plague, and the veins that are near the colon, and it is muddied the color of the patient's skin, and it expires a great spirit, and demands attraction of cold air.
And if you cut into the juice in the veilment which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes a great cry with vehement pain and sighing, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if you cut into the juice in the stomach, then it strongly affects the plague with some kind of indigestion.
And if you cut into the juice in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, then it is some kind of wound of the plague, or the web, or hernia which is disordered, and there is no hope in the cure by extraction of the juice.
And if the juice cuts into the bladder, and it is situated before urine, and it processes some cause at the divided parts before, and it strongly affects pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Perhaps the other members are like the face, the colon, and the gullet, and the splinters and the adjutors, and the spondyles of the back, and the furcula, and the coxa, and the leg and their similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the juice does not encounter a vein or an artery and is not a venomous juice.
And you recompose that to you which you have seen of the being of these juices, because it signifies for you about the true cure.
Which cause is, because in one case the juice flows into the lacrimal duct of the eye from the root of the nose, and you extract it from the other part, leaving the grayish color of the aurelia, and it is healthy, and does not affect the eye with numbness.
And you extract another juice from a Jew who had it in the gray of his eye, behind the eyelid, and the juice was hidden and not obtained from that except a small extremity which adheres to the grayish fist, and it was a great juice among the sharp juices of the Turks, with iron leon in which there were no aurelias.
And the Jew is healthy, and does not affect his eye with a bad accident.
And here is the translation:
He extracted another arrow from a man whose belly was dislocated, and he thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he had not moved for thirty days and no change had occurred in his condition, he examined the arrow again and began to understand its nature, and he recovered, and the bad accident did not happen to him.
There was a man in whom an arrow was lodged in his back, and the wound had consolidated over him, and since he had been suffering for seven years, the arrow had taken root in the thigh bone.
There was a woman in whom an arrow was lodged in her belly, and the wound had consolidated inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not experience any discomfort in some of her natural functions.
There was another man in whom an arrow was lodged in his face and the wound had consolidated, and they removed the arrow, not experiencing much pain, and it seemed almost miraculous.
He extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And he was called for the treatment of his wound, which was about to be healed within three days.
And then he felt the wound of the arrow very slightly; and then he inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but he sensed it a little below the right shoulder, and then he supposed that this sensation was due to the extremity of the arrow.
And he applied a plaster to the place where it was attracting and digestive, trusting in me that the place would be affected by what appeared to me as the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed over it.
And no significant accident occurred in that place where the arrow had reached; and he continued to apply the plaster over it for many days without any accident; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and the pain of the extraction subsided within many days until one day I felt the arrow inside my nose and recognized it as mine.
And then he paused on the acute corrosive medicinal wound for many days until it was opened, and with a gentle touch, he examined that, and felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the thigh.
And then he adjusted the application of the wound to that acute medicine until it appeared clearly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I spent my time on that for a period of four months.
And then since the wound was amplified, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I mastered that, and did not obey the usual method, meanwhile I did not cease to subtly engineer and contrive about it in various ways of contraption, until one day I began to use a device with descending forceps, according to the form of those at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then he restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and he restored it and the wound consolidated, and the patient was completely healthy, and there remained no defect in him for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows because it pauses that rule and significance about what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the artisans know how to compare little about much; and they are present about what is absent; and they find a new operation and novel instrument that descends from the external causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other part.
And that which is gone by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a carnal place, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the essence of the hour at which it is caught, then it happens that you will leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obey its essence, then leave it for some days and try to attract it with motion on any day, and it will be forgotten.
And if you do not obey its essence for some days, then it happens that you will perforate the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the whole part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
Perhaps the arrowhead is embedded in the location of the body, and it is embedded in the sentiment, then you should make an attempt to probe that, and if you feel that, then you should use certain instruments which are convenient for its extraction.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you should make an incision over the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrowhead.
And if you have the instruments which are necessary, then you should cut the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts to the very edge that you may be able to remove; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it becomes obedient.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrowhead in whatever location it is, then you should use a twisting motion with your hand and forceps on all parts until it becomes obedient; and subtly use a subtle subtlety so that the arrowhead is not broken and it is made difficult for you to extract it.
And if you cannot operate on it at that time, then you should leave it for several days until the parts that are in its vicinity can be purified, and then repeat it because then it will be alleviated. Perhaps you have caused a contrary flow of blood, then you should administer what we have said about cure in the seventh chapter.
And beware of your virtue of insight into veins or nerves, or cords, and administer instruments in all manner possible for the evacuation of the arrowhead; and make it facilitated and tranquil and slow and firm, just as you know and as I have recommended.
And therefore you should make a counter-incision to remove the arrowhead so that the patient may be according to the figure according to which you have deviated from the judgment of the arrowhead in him, for it is perhaps more just. Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you should administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the arrowheads that are counter-set by the opposite part, or that have proceeded to some part outside, or have made the extraction of the arrowhead difficult by sentiment of the part above the codeine propounded and sometimes that is eminent; therefore you should section about that; and it should be the section according to the quantity in which they take hold with the forceps; and then you should attempt that, for it is made lighter by experience.
Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the lamina according to counter-pressure until the arrowhead is embedded in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat it until you find success.
And if the thrust of the arrowhead is in that, then you should impel it with the instrument.
Perhaps if the thrust is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you should introduce and insert it, if it is dull, instrument concavely so that it enters the cavity of the arrowhead in the hollow of the bone and then impel it with the instrument.
Perhaps if the arrowhead is concave, then you should impel it with a strong instrument entering into that, for the arrowhead is alleviated by that.
And if the arrowhead is intoxicated, then it is necessary that you concave all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with what is convenient.
And if the arrowhead is caught in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near so that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and beware of insight into veins or nerves, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indigent, and cure it until it is healthy.
The form of forceps which are suitable for extracting arrowheads:
They are the extensions of their ends like a bird's beak which are made with serrations when they take hold of the arrowhead so that it does not escape.
And of those are caused by excessive motions, great, few and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of the small weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of the constriction of it.
Also with a ray to prevent the instrument from entering it in the concave arrow, and it is propelled also at that.
Of the bloodletting of the veins.
The veins of bloodletting, which customarily run to be bloodletted thus. of those that are in the head 16. It is two pulsating veins that are near the ears, it is said in the authorities; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are under the lip; and two veins that are above the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and it is two veins that are beneath the tongue. More, the veins that are bloodletted in the arms thus. Because of those, one is a cephalic, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and sour, and it's a moderate vein, and it's composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and it's the end of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's that one which appears above the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein which is between the auricular finger and the small finger, and so in the two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the knee of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophea, and its place is below the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhal, ancient and migratory and sapiential and ulcerous evils of the bad head, from ancient times.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you recommended to you: it is that the head of the patient be raised, and the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput at the place of both veins with a gentle touch; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage inside which appears the two veins and their places near the ears in two preeminent places of the head; and if you feel that tie, and if you sense the pulse of those in the tied digit, here it will be tended.
Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it below the vein in the codeine until the bloodletting comes out to the bone. And then raise your hand on the vein and codeine to the upper parts and incidentally incise the vein in an incidental incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two digits adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strengthen the pulse and let it settle in until it is healthy.
And already I have preceded in the commencement of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More, of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the treatment of bloodletting is for ancient and malicious migraines and perpetual and continuous ophthalmia and body of acute overflowing effusions to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what you recommended to you: constrict the patient's seat with a motive inside so that the two veins appear at the sentiment for manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse of those below the tied digit; and then it will be tended.
And then you raise the codeine above the vein to the upper parts with the tied digit indicated, and introduce the bloodletting incidentally below, and raise the vein in its place; and incise it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and stop the tied digit on the vein for an hour, and then stop above that cut and pulse and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and let it settle in until it is healthy.
And already proceeded the memory of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the commencement of the book.
Thus the youthful treatment of phlebotomy of the vein at the forehead is suitable for phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and purge fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; so it is that the patient should hold the sieve with a bandage around the arm, and take the instrument which is called a fleam, of which this is the form.
Pause at the prominent point where the fleam is placed on that vein and puncture it with a pen or another instrument in your hand, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and hold it in place until it is healed.
And some evacuated veins are opened in phlebotomy, however it is not known that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a fat extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and fortifies the tendons in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
The youthful treatment of the two veins that are also the lachrymals of two eyes for scabbing of the eyes to purge and cleanse them, and at the evils of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should hold the arm with a bandage, and then phlebotomize them, and you stand steady over the head of it.
And it is done the phlebotomy according to the transverse a little at a time with a small phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, it fortifies the tendons of its extremity.
And then let the blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and hold it for one night, and then release it.
The phlebotomy of the vein at the nose is convenient for acute fever and vehement sweat, and at the evils of the face and to emigrate and purge what accumulates on the face, and it is more effective when it is ancient.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient should hold the arm and you place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle phlebotomy longwise and fix it in the middle spot at the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sense here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
You know that you open your hand on the phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because it is restored lightly.
The youthful treatment of phlebotomy of the two guidons leads to constriction of the wings and commencement of leprosy and to many evils and impetigo and bad corroding ulcers, thus with herpetromeno.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient should hold them with a ligament on the arm; and there are artificial devices on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein at length with a small phlebotomy little by little; and then extract blood according to temperate quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the ligament and hold the two veins with a moderate structure so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and let it enter into the morning because the plague is healed.
And the youthful treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerich veins, comforts small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and at bad ulcers that are in the nose and in their circle.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit down in front of you, and hold the arm with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of it and regard the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the negation of each of both, and that is why in the circle of those there are small black veins; and then you inscribe each one for an incidental incision.
If there is doubt in you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you undertake the incision of the larger of those, and of the most manifest pustule of those.
And make it similar to the two veins that are on the lips above.
The youthful treatment of the two veins that are below the tongue is suitable for phlebotomy of the cephalic to precocious ones that are in the throat, at the evils of the uvula, and at the evils of the mouth.
And the quality of flatulence is that which follows the patient between their hands, in front of the sun, and raises their tongue, and looks below their tongue, from one vein on the left and another vein on the right, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
And then flatulence occurs; and beware that you do not ultimately place your hand in flatulence during those, for below those are arteries.
And your veins that are flatulent in the hollow of the artery, where it usually correlates with all the humors, and the flatulence of theirs is done according to two methods, either by placing the mirtilated or olive oil on subtlety declining; or by evacuating the cutellar flatulence, and applying it to the lessening, and this is their form.
It is the side of the thus-come-times, and it convenes to open the concave full veins proceeding apparently gross, and to those that contain a great gross turbid.
And this flatulence is of lesser latitude and of purer subtle extremity, and it convenes to flatulence of subtle veins that contain a pure subtle citrus.
Moreover, the juvament of the flatulence of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts the sap from the bad humors that are below the gullet and the colon, and from that which sieves the chest and the belly.
And it convenes to the flatulence-doctor, when that flatulence occurs, that he guards well that and is above-trembling in that, for below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flatulence, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of sap, so that it seems that he does not flatulence on that which is a pungent flatulence, unless he is secting with lessening.
And if the basilica does not appear through manifest appearance, then it seems that you should leave that and move to another, or seek some other branch; or that flatulence occurs at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and it will be lessened with flatulence thus as we have said.
Moreover, if you want the flatulence of the thigh, then it seems that within the structure of the arm that touches the place between which you know the place of the pulses, and places a sign above the hand; and places the arm and evacuates the vein in concave section with flatulence thus as we have said; and beware that you do not strike the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
And when you do so, as you stretch the ligament, it swells in the place where you have felt the hand, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if the sap flows in the flatulence thus as aurina of an infant, and the sap is subtle rouge, then you know that it is of the sap of the artery; and then you touch and pause the said tieu above for a long space; and place the said tieu, and if the sap is absorbed, because many evacuated sap is absorbed, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
And beware of the patient's humor, and be above-trembling of it and do not handle that for some days until it is sanctified.
Moreover, if the sap is not absorbed, and it seems that you do not present medicine to that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is constricted, and the sap is absorbed; or take a gentle pinch, and finish that, and take one measurement and stretch it above the place of the vein with strict structure and ligament and pulses until another day.
And then if the sap is absorbed, it is good; and if not, then cure that with water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the powdered absorbents to flux of sap.
And the absorption of the sap of it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Moreover, of the dark vein, the flatulence is juvament that extracts the sap from the upper part of the head and to the lower part of the body; for it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of cephalica, thus as we have said.
And it seems that the flatulence-doctor should be above-trembling in the flatulence of it, for below it is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the flatulence and touches the nerve, he will cause stupor to it, and it is difficult to heal it, and far from being sanctified, And this nerve appears many evacuated sentiments; and if it is occulted at some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it seems that you should pause the flatulence in which you flatulence in section of lessening, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
If the vein is between two nerves, then you must divide the vein along its length.
The treatment of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to attract the blood from the head and confer relief to the pains of the shoulders.
And take care in this procedure, if you want the phlebotomies to puncture either olive or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, since it neither touches an artery nor a nerve.
May the emperor's strength be apostemated in some men, when they are not phlebotomized by the primary percussion, may they not harm themselves in that aposteme.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and in hope of its benefit and caution against the occurrence of pains, and that it be done phlebotomy on one of the veins that are in the hollow, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when apparent signs of fullness.
And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at the first hour after sunrise, once three hours have passed since yesterday.
May phlebotomy that is administered, may it bring convenience and necessity to whom it is given, whether at night or day, in every hour and at all times.
And take care that infants are not phlebotomized until they have fourteen years, and females who are pregnant are not phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and old people are not phlebotomized if they have passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some mania, take care that you purge the stools beforehand with a clyster of Leon, if in those there is retained matter, so that the veins do not attract superfluities in the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not harm the principal members.
And they are not phlebotomized, the patients who have nausea and cramp, nor those who evacuate badly or have a tremble until what is retained is removed from them, nor those with hydropic pain, and may phlebotomy be tempered according to colic passion and according to vomiting, and according to belly pain, and according to multiplication of cough and of trouble and of exercise of fasting or of vigils and of all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it is corporal28 or animal.
And also consider in subtlety of humors beforehand if the blood is gross, with wine and beer, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And also enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or is excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtled.
And pause the phlebotomy of it on the feet of the day, that is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
And perform for you that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents, animals, thus as it is anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, thus as it is trouble and excessive pain and cough and similar to them.
And at its session, make sure to present the causes in the use of that which corrects customarily among men with aromatics and odors and balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibilities.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is put above the cushion of the one who must be phlebotomized.
And also extract the sick arm, and rub that one with their hand the phlebotomist does twice or three times; and also strengthen the ligament in correction and involve that one twice.
And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is a mollification, and then it prohibits the body's blood vessels.
And also the structure, take care that the one who must be phlebotomized rubs their hands together among them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the feeling.
And also the phlebotomist anoints the sick phlebotomy with a little oil antic properly; and also pauses the sick finger of the left hand over that vein, beneath the spot where one wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein becomes a little, and the percussion is seated because among the veins it is the one that touches thus like a fleeing cord gives the phlebotomy, and of those it is full of windiness and when pauses the phlebotomy over that it is constricted thus the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not uncover the vein, and if it uncovers, that is stretched.
Therefore, it is necessary that the flower-picking surgeon be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And then stop the bloodletting, for if a vein is opened in a vessel, then it is good; and if not, you will open another vessel below that place on the arm, or above, if the place is not affected.
And if the place is affected, or the patient becomes weaker, then you will leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because the strong compression can cause an aposteme, nor enter into a bath.
And then perform bloodletting if necessary.
And if the perception is small and you subtly feel the blood flowing, and you fear that it will not flow in the quantity that you want, then you perform bloodletting in that tract according to rectitude and adjust the perception a little, and do so with careful attention before the place becomes affected, because the place becomes affected in many homes for a short time with little perception.
But if it has already become affected, then do not touch it, because you cannot attribute any cause to it; and pause on that part of the ulcer of the oil, because it alleviates the body's blood. And it is better in this place where the oil is, and that the other oils.
And similarly, administer the oil of the ulcer in all bloodletting, in which bloodletting the veins are prohibited from the body's blood, and make a tyrical alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtly revolved when it is gross.
And if in the place of bloodletting a great aposteme is generated, because many vessels are injured, and it worsens for one who has not been bled since that vessel, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you apply, and pause on the place with a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And it is necessary that you make points on the surface of the blood of that vein in complement to it or another vein.
And if you remain on the place for several days with some blackness or viridity, do not notice it; and if you want, pause on that cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calamint or similar to it.
And many vessels are injured so that apostemes and eminences come from bloodletting of the basilica.
And then stop your hand on that, and if then you apply a soft compress on that, then that eminence is evil and bad; and therefore beware that you pause on that cause of what we have said, because the strong flow of the artery's blood.
And do the plastering in that place where it is stipulated, so that the place may be hardened, and then heal another wound with another cure until it is healthy.
And it is necessary that you extract from the blood all men according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color appearing on the blood, as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you will leave it until it is red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you will leave it until it is subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acuity of it is stopped.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a vessel, that the bloodletting of the vein be amplified and the bloodletting be wide.
And in one who is frail, do the contrary of that, and it is necessary to extract that in many vessels, and that the tract be straight.
And the better way to administer bloodletting of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this manner of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and injury of nerves, and it is more laudable and more safe than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
And at that time it is customary to add syncopes of bloodletting, and it is necessary that you cure it beforehand with bloodletting in a small infusion of mild milk or simple oximel scalded; and extract the blood from three vessels or four.
And if it is complicated by completeness, then take beforehand with bloodletting for infusion in a syrup of mint or in a syrup of mel aromatized with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an aromatized syrup and very odorous.
And if it is injured by syncopes of bloodletting, and it is the cause of much blood issuing, then it is necessary to take in drinking water of carnation and syrup very odorous subtle; and use aromaticity with some galea, and let the sieve foot be in that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division of the chapter on syncopes for evacuation.
And if you want to evacuate the serum from the arm and dissolve the second evacuation of blood, it is necessary to make a small incision in the place where phlebotomy is done for moderate evacuation, and the strength of the patient is frail, which evacuates little by little, according to the quantity of strength in continuous days.
But if you want to evacuate the serum from the arm, and give the second vein, and the body is strong, then do it about 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
But if you want to attract the blood from the body to the opposite part of the affected area, it is necessary that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is much blood already inflamed and excited, it is necessary that a great quantity of blood be let out at once and amplified perception occurs before syncope sets in; for you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse of the patient's arm, so that no death occurs in the place of syncope, because many evacuations are made when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is very difficult to extract the blood, that you press with vehemence and curvature, which is too bad.
Having the lancet inside until it is phlebotomized a second time; or remove it with the acidity of the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over it a tyrical or sagzenial, and compress it with a gentle pressure until the blood is stopped.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation is calmed.
And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you should make an incision in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in the place of the fork or the basilica, when they are not overgrown or not hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand in warm water until the vein becomes manifest and appears clearly.
And then it should be tightened over the vein with a moderate ligature; and then phlebotomize according to the small transverse incision, not lateral nor longitudinal.
And it should be a broad perception and your phlebotomy is the one where you phlebotomize over the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water, and it is customary to pause the flow of blood in warm water during winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is more salvageable than all the other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the little finger of the right hand is conducive to the illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly demonstrated to the sight; and then phlebotomize transversely; and if you do not succeed, do not worry about it.
And beware that you do not ultimately phlebotomize your hand, because then the nerves of the fingers are exposed and stripped of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated too much; and similarly, it is necessary that you do everything in a straight and orderly manner.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that vein on the left hand is that it is conducive to the illnesses of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of this vein as you have done on the other.
And the benefit of the cephalic vein phlebotomy is for the illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, as well as for the illnesses of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcerations of thighs and old sores, and for their similar illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their foot in warm water and makes friction over that place until the veins appear; and you should make an incision on the joint of the foot with a curved movement; and the place of the vein is apparent from the bottom of the toes, and from there it ramifies on the surface of the foot, which has many ramifications.
And therefore apply a poultice of abundant soft material around the leg, which is swollen and red, because it is better and more soothing.
And if you apply a poultice on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath the surface of the foot, and pause your poulticing there, where you are applying it across, lest you wish to cause an injury.
And let the poultice be gentle.
But if it is prohibited to stop the flow of blood; then you should immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow out, so that it may be evacuated.
And if the poultice-maker erred in the first dressing, then remove the poultice from one place, because the area is salty; and do not fear the evil magic, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make a poultice on the opposite foot in the same way.
And of the sciatic vein, the area is as we have said, namely beneath the heel near the Silvester's joint.
And the juice of the poultice of it is good for pain when it is due to blood cautery.
And the quality of the poultice of it is that the patient enters in a bath, and binds and strengthens the thigh of the injured leg underneath the heel, beneath four fingers in a long subtle bandage, so that it does not appear except for that.
And therefore when it appears, then you apply the poultice according to each engine that is possible for you and according to the traverse, and it is better; or you insert it for insertion or you suck it out for suction, because the area of it is salty.
And it is in many homes greatly feared; and if you touch it, and it does not appear to the whole sentiment, then apply some soft material of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, near the auricular and the ring finger.
And beware of the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you wish.
And then release the structure and pause over the area of the poultice, and strengthen the area, because the loosening is healthy.
About ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilations are of horns, or of iron, or of glass.
And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two manners, because one is with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, among which one is where the nocturnal ventilations are paused, and it is the last part of the head; and the thousandth place is in two parts of the neck together; and ventilations of the chin beneath the jawbone beneath the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is on the end of the hip; and ventilations of two foci, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two thighs.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture the virtue through those, just as it is captured by poulticing; nor does it cover that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any illness made for replenishment until the whole body is evacuated.
But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuity, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time it is.
And therefore when it happens for any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle of the month, then I command that ventilation should be done more than two or three hours after dawn.
And the benefit of ventilation of the nuca is that when it confers gravity on the head and adds to what is found in the eyes; but I think that it should be near evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is at the place of poulticing of the cephalic region.
It is not lawful to use that of him who is of complete fragility, or in which there is a flow, because it gives great harm.
And therefore it is not suitable to use those veins, and in the heads of those which are badly affected by fragile parts.
But to him who is continuously suffering over that, it is caused by forgetfulness; and therefore it is suitable that you command the apothecary to place his hand a little above the affected parts below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
The apothecary's ventilation is in the place of fleubotomia of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and to the constriction of the wing and to the scission of the instrument of the wing, and to all, and to repetition.
And it is suitable that the apothecary's ventilation be impelled a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
And the apothecary's ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, and emigration, and prefocation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomia of the basilica.
And it is suitable that you command the apothecary not to press his hand on scarification so that he does not incise the artery and accelerate fluxes of blood.
And the apothecary's ventilation below the mouth confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to resemblance to those bad things that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomia of aliheric which is in both lips.
But the apothecary's ventilation that is made on both spatulas confers to captivation, which is made for repetition of heat.
And the apothecary's ventilation of both divided parts of the focus confers juvenation of the fleubotomia of three veins, thus it is of the basilica, dark and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those veins plus manifold that are in the flesh, and those manifold veins from the other gross veins until they pervade the attraction to the three veins.
And command the apothecary that he should not proceed too much in scarification, because the place is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation with which one ventilates over the hips and confers to the hemorrhoids of the buttock and to the ulcers below.
And it is suitable that you command the apothecary to make a great ventilation, and that it be of iron, because the place induces strong dryness; and strongly they are traumatized by subtle ventilations and it should be scarified in scarification.
But ventilations of the smaller limbs are diminished for manifest diminution, because they attract the blood from all the body, and confers to ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confers to bothor and ademil; and it is in the place of fleubotomia of two siphons, and alahorcoben, and of two cavities.
However, I will not belittle the entire body and cause syncopy in many places.
And from the ventilations of alahorcoben, the juvenation is propelled to the juvenation of the ventilations of both limbs.
And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that it pauses the ventilation at the beginning of the vein and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the ventilations, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains with those quietly, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingenuity. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already enraged and inflated and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who is of tender flesh and rare pores, it is suitable that you scarify him once a week and no more, so that the place may not be ulcerated.
And command the apothecary to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction to facilitate.
And if the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify twice a week, because in the first week it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its aquosity. But in the second (week) to the perscrutation acquired from the extraction of the gross blood.
And if the blood is very filthy, then it is suitable to make a third scarification for that it cleans the worse.
And gradually, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract much blood, we shall make many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify by deep scarification.
And the term of scarification in which lies the depth of the ulcer so only then.
And if the ulcer is large, hard, dark, and the veins are very constricted, it is because the places of the ventoses are not tender, but rather resolved; if it is in summer time, thus with oil of lavender or violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of sanic, and to those that seem alike.
And if the excess is large, fresh, then the oil should be of marjoram, or of balsamic, or of lavender, or of anise, and to those that seem alike.
Perhaps if the ventoser is of ample pores to tender flesh, then it is prohibited from oil, and it is seen that the places of ventoses are washed with lukewarm water or fresh water of solatrum, or water of chamomile, or water of bordolaguas, and similarly to those.
And that of which the wound is of much humidity, wash its ventoses with agreeable wine, or water of myrt and sumac and similarly to those.
And of that which the excesses are large, wash its ventoses with old wine, or water of sanseco, which is majorana, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to those that seem alike.
And it is seen that the ventosation should be kept at a distance from steam; having seen that it should be administered close to the steam of the bath for an hour or two, and it is seen that it sleeps close to the ventosation.
What is it that should be governed so that the ventosed one is released from phlebotomy before ventosation.
It is seen that you consider the commencement: then if the ventoser or he who should be phlebotomized is choleric and vents about the wound with agitation and inflammation, then it is seen that it takes causes of cooling, thus with milky acetoses, and endivia in an agreeable wine, and sacanabin, and julep, and to those that seem alike.
And pause at their windows thus with poultices, and flesh of auricular spongy parts, and windows constricted with gruel, and to those that seem alike.
And of that which the complexion is fresh, it is seen that it takes in drinking essence of ivory, or essence of auricular saponaceous parts of semensas, and sumac, and there is much odorant mirth between viel and noel; and that it is commanded to use little drink and to eat, and pause at the windows of its poultices and canabir and pissers and small auricular spongy parts and columbat.
And it is seen that on the day of ventosation and phlebotomy, the drink should be more than the window.
And it is seen that it should be given in drink at certain hours to certain homes tyriaca alpharac, or medications of musk, so it is musked, or alcilite near the ventosation or near phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and the wound is subtle; and it is not seen that they take that scalpel.
Perhaps the ventoses that are scarified are ventoses that are paused on the feet, and above the ankle and gout, and above the navel, in the places of the joints, and the inflammation of the anch; because these members do not suffer from scarification over themselves.
And it is not sought for those except attraction of wound of member, thus with paused ventosation on the mamilha in malady of flux of wound of the wounds of the nars; and use of that so that the fresh ventosity is dissolved, inviscated from the member, thus with paused on the belly and the navel; because that rarefies the member and scales it and removes the pain since resolves ventosity.
And already it is paused on the knees when they accumulate in their opacity or pus, because for virtue of strong attraction the humble opacity is fortified and eradicates the pus from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is paused on the feet and ankle, thus ventosity is enclosed in those enclosures.
And these ventoses are administered with juice only then; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
And some vegetables are administered full of water of tea in the maladies of the ankle.
And that is why the ventosation should be filled and should be more grand, thus it is hot water alone or water in which there are cooked herbs for that convenience.
Form of ventosation administered at the fire: it is the amplitude of the orifice of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice should be the size of a palm; and it is in the latz of lu, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of lu, the tube is small according to the quantity that enters into lu with a needle.
It is necessary to make a circular motion with the hand, of large massage strokes, with the elbow, and with fingers in order to not displace the member from its position on it.
And make a gentle sweep of the hand or of iron, placing a candle flame at the focus.
And this is the great remedy that we have recommended; and the small pause of that according to the illnesses and the state of he who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the old people are extended to others, that is, the cupping glasses of the young and of large bodies.
And the quality of applying this cupping glass to the focus on the member is that it extends the flame decently and gently in a small candle of wax, and places it above the transverse vein at the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the trajectory that we have said, until when we hold the cupping glasses and do not intend to open the finger and let the vapor escape over that trajectory, then the cupping glass will be almost dissolved.
And adjust the flame according to its manner, and remove it if you sense that it is indigestible to him.
There is a cupping glass that is administered in the case of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or trajectory, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member just so.
And this is its form: This cupping glass, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 148.
Blood-sucking cups are not administered on most members except on those in which it is not possible to place cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum, and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similarly.
And the quality of using those that you have found blood-sucking cups that are on the stagnant waters of muddy places.
And then they are left in the stagnant water during the day and night until they become famished, and no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through flebotomy and cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is cleansed until it becomes red; and then they are placed above it.
And when they are filled and fallen.
And if it is possible to suck out the matter from the place of the cupping glass, it is more desirable in juvament (treatment).
And otherwise, then wash the place with vinegar and then with much water; and it should be cleansed and expressed.
And if the body of the wound is prolonged by the removal of blood-sucking cups, and it is that which remains, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it above until the suppuration is absorbed.
And if the wound is multiplying, then powder it with vitriol thrice, or gall and similar to them among the stiptic causes, until the wound is abscessed; or place on the spot the mastics of excocicated beans, and leave them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the wound is abscessed.
And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood-sucking cups, when it is possible to move them.
And if the blood-sucking cups are prohibited from suspension, then cleanse the spot of recent wound or place a needle in the spots until the wound scabs; and then they are placed, for they sense some wound that is almost adhered.
And when you want them to fall, powder over them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or ash, and it will happen almost immediately.
Thus begins the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, know that I have thrown out of this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgar ones who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I do not have it and obliated anything from it at any time; and no one has habituated to it afterwards, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding, until they extract the science from them.
And then I direct my effort and study to the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experience; since here I abbreviate it for you others and deliver it from occupation of elongation; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered there, as it is done by addition of declaration, thus I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from being broken bones, which of them a necessary prior permission is, before we start remembering the fractured members and diverse ones. It is fitting then that I should define the summaries of this sermon in the prohemium of this chapter; and the chapters for understanding those which from the beginning are established by the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are so prompt to know or learn this noble art other than you.
And then I say that when accidents occur from a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing, then it is fitting that you should hasten to the beginning of phlebotomy or alleviate that, or whatever symptoms, if no cause prohibits it, thus with debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs often, or in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And it is fitting to be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and game, and to prohibit gross meats and to fill up on diets and all diets that fill the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostema caution, and if you do not have fear of effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to their first regimen as it was customary for them.
And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is fitting that the patient should be nourished with nutritious diets of moderate and light food in which there is viscosity, thus as if their diets were made from wheat flour, and rice, and vegetables, and fish, and cattle stomachs, and newts, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar foods to those, and at this regimen it makes a coagulation of the fracture pus more easily and milder.
And you know that the broken bones when they are in the old men who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit ones, it is not possible that they can continue and consolidate according to their nature through the desiccation of their limbs.
But nature's power adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause like glue in which it is grossly stated that it adheres and strengthens until they are conglutinated and united, until they come to the end of fortification and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from their own works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the diets of the patient, diets in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, thus as we have said.
And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I have come to a remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in the following chapter, distinct from the other.
Variety of fracture in itself is measured. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; because there is a curved fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veins are made into a fracture according to the length of the bone: and thus the fractures of the sagitta and astelhas and additio proceeding and not-proceeding, thus as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a fracture with small fissure.
And to all species is given or torment proper in restoration of it according to that which will come to remembrance of it distinctly in the following places.
Sign of fracture of the bone. And for that is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is twistedness of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and thus of it when it comprises that with your hand.
And then when it is not in the place of apparent twistedness nor is it felt by the finger touching when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that it is twistedness or small fissure, therefore you should not touch it with your hand and make compression of all; pause on it for the medicines of which you have remembrance at that moment, which convenes to the place; and then it is straight for subtle structure.
And you know that the place where it is curved and not separated into two or other than that which does not occur in the sagitta, thus as it is remembered all part of its comparison, then it is fitting to begin from your hour to rectification of it, since it has apostema caution.
And if it has apostema caution, then let it be for some days until the apostema ceases; and then you should lift it according to whatever manual method you can use for lifting and generating.
You know that restoration of it and agility of it are less than the bone in which it is accustomed to reside.
And then strengthen that second wind that will bring back the memory of it.
Sometimes in the bone there are stagnations, then it is necessary to extend this torn member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or have your hand if the member is small; or have two cords or have a cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you hold the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the torn member are returned, then you will perform that they return to their place and according to each manual art that you can do in their places.
And beware that you do not fall over the patient during your operation, nor cause any harm; and perform according to your gentle power that you apply one bone to another as their best companions, according to their better forms.
And it is convenient that at that hour you touch with your hand, and if sometimes here there is some diverse cause, rectify it and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors who make vain gestures do, which makes them precipitate caution in their operation, or make them contradict in the member, just as we have seen through the operation of their vain gestures.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because you know that torn members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small such as the arm and the finger and the vein and similar to those, then it is convenient that the envelopment be with very subtle wrapping.
Sometimes those that are large such as the hip or the leg, it is convenient that in those there be a hard and durable envelopment, because the hard bond connects the great member and strengthens it entirely in equal structure, so that in it there is no macula.
And then begin, then your evacuation of equality, pause the convenient ligament according to that, on the place of that fracture with three envelopments or four according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little in the ligament.
And then see that it is on the superior part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen less so that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself in the envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure bit by bit, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other wounded part over the torn place in envelopment, and then see that the envelopments are on the superior part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the envelopment and in softening of it according to what we have said in the primary envelopment from above.
And then pause between the turns of a wrapping or cloth on which the tortuousness of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuousness in it; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any cause.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize over these envelopments decently made as much as possible, if in the place there is no inflammation or apostema caution, and then pause on it that settles the apostema and stops the inflammation; and lay it aside for some days; and then you strengthen over the stalks.
And these stalks are of the majesty of a reed cane, and be formed saviently; or they are of fir wood; or of palm branches; and it is the width of each stalk according to this form and figure.
However, it is convenient that the stalk which is paused over that fracture be thicker and longer a little than the other stalks, and the length of the stalk according to what is legitimated to the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the stalks with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then tie from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more elongated from the fracture, it mends the structure.
It seems that the heart is making the veins larger in thickness and subtlety, and it is from the vein's own power; if the veins are too large, thus you have seen through the operation of certain foolish doctors who loosen the cords of the twisted vein, and it is a great error, when the strict structure is not equal.
The subtle veins are not so convenient, because you do not constrict them for the strict structure that is there, and it does not seem that between this and this there is less of a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to the strict structure in those places, then pause and stop the flow of the lion's or lanolin-enriched ointment entering there so that it does not make a lesion.
Some bruised fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find a remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
And you know that not all broken members are straight on the first day; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not seem to pause over the stars for seven or eight days, according to your secure advancement of caution against aposteme.
And this is the manner of the implanters among whom the Ancients restored, who were skilled in setting bones back in place after fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of implanting as a help for restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major injuries to the veins and to the efflux, because it is about that which neither heat nor cold reaches: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
And you trust that thus it is, but that you remove the crust from the white of the egg, and pause the complexation of the non-expansive and subtle; and then use that.
Another manual of implanting fractures and dislocations: recipe for assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from a thousand grains of salvaged millet, each drachm; of myrrh and aloes, one drachm; alochil, two drachms; all are ground and mixed with water or album of Huou, if the complexity of the patient's injury is scalded; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones effectively, and confers a great remedy.
Another manual of implanting which confers on a fracture and dislocation: recipe migrach and metal of white alta, one drachm; of myrrh and aloes, one drachm five; of acacia, six drachms; of Armenian boil, two drachms.
All three are ground in a mortar with a very strong contraction, and all are crushed, and all are mixed with water or egg white and it is administered.
Method of implanting for joints and separated bones in their places, and then sudden pain occurs in those and fissures and fractures: take a lane poultice and submerge it in warm oil and cook it and place it over the area.
More in this implanting there is no virtue of restoration, of cautious aposteme and expelling pains properly.
Another method of implanting that restores broken bones: take poultices of fig tree sort and poultices of salvaging poppy; mix all together and make an implanting of it.
Method of implanting abbreviated for administration gives restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remnants of aposteme: recipe roots of altitude, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of peas, of all one part. all three are ground and all are mixed with wine, if the member is not scalded.
More if it is scalded, then you trust that with water of sweet colander humid or with water and use it.
Another method of implanting that is strong in resolution, which this first one does, when it causes aposteme hard until the restoration of the member: recipe of roots of altitude and of seeds of the iliac, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all one part; all three are ground and all are mixed with water of sage or water of dew or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
More, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it is placed over the broken member until its restoration, unless a wax figure is made of wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it be more subtle between thickness and subtlety.
Most of Galen's writings are visible because they placed emphasis on the restoration of the broken member and the causes in which it becomes dry with little warmth, thus similarly to wonder, they seem and resemble those causes that we have recounted.
Many remedies for plastering that comfort the lesion and pain: take honey, from ceses, from skins of inscized men or punishment of auzel, and of altaea, and salt, divided into equal parts; they are trissated and cribellated and they make a good plaster.
The amount according to which one covers the lesion and then it is dislocated, is that you consider if there has been no pain nor inflammation nor the bone is broken nor moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days. And if it happens at the place of strong pain or inflammation or swelling, then you touch or anoint it at that hour, and remove its plaster.
And take a cloth of linen and a humid marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the inflammation and pain are calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it a lane sutza submerged in warm oil or rosat oil, and leave it on for nine nights until you are certain of apostema cure, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, not too strong for your primary constriction, and subtly soften it until it is healed.
And if the apostema and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are thus entirely removed, and you have indicted for plaster and structure, then you apply it thus as you had begun with gentle engagement.
And if none of those causes affect the member that we have mentioned, then you do not delay it except for three days or four or five. and some remedies altogether are left on for twenty days according to how it appears for the dislocation of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and assist in the thickening of the patient's vein, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Most of the time, if you discover the place of the fracture is dry and thin more than it should be, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from penetrating to that; and therefore embrocate it with warm water from all remedies that are applied to it; and let it be thus for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the member's nourishment, and it is healthily restored.
Most of the time, that which makes foolish restorers of a fracture of a member another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to what is suitable, and it is restored according to twisting, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a director who aggravated the Antics in their free books and obtained work in that.
And I have not seen up to some of them who do thus far, because it is more reasonable that they do not do so.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it affects the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by percussion of a space, and the percussion breaks all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, thus as it happens in the fust, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the space incises some part of the bone, and incises the flesh of it and does not pass the incision to the back of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and its cause is percussion with poverty or falling upon stone, and it resembles them.
And this fracture is penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is behind the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little.
And this fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason it is named this species of fracture capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made or by falling or by percussion of stone and it resembles them, which makes enter some lamina of the bone into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave place thus as it happens to the roles of eram when they happen to their percussion and it is divided into the entering parts.
And it is mainly made in the bodies of human bones, thus as it happens to the heads of elephants.
And so all these species of fractures are classified, so they are weighed thus as stars separated. And you will find a remedy for all this in its place.
I will examine all these species of fractures for detection on those and for inquiry into their tendons and ostement of corrupted flesh that is above them.
The species of hair-like fibers is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleansed, and anointed with liniment on their tendons, because the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fractures, consider at the commencement the accidents of the patient, and then if you perceive through the accidents that signify manifest signs over fear, thus as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of votes, and syncope, and acute fever, and effacement of the veins and rigor of those, and semblance to their accidents in the major dispositions, these do not depart from sanity.
And if you perceive non-concurrent accidents you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is that if it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it is a plague and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the ostement of the bone within the 14th day according to total disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is below the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is among divided and atrophied parts, then it is necessary that you cut the divided and atrophied part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner possible to you, according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you to make the detection of the bone, either blood flow or apostemic heat, then you oppose yourself to what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of drizzling infusions in wine and oil, and make the plague repose until the apostema is sedated, and be sure of blood flow; and then begin with the circulation of the bone and its ablation.
And that will be according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you cut the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision like this, a little wider later than that; and this is its form.
And then administer more incisions wider than the preceding one.
And it is necessary that you have different names of various incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or felt.
And use them to facilitate percussion on the incision so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in its circuit within while you administer the incisions with the taravelles, which are called non-deep taravelles.
And it is not so named thus except that those do not reach the term of the bone to what is near it, so that the taravel is rounded extremity or margin above that which is below the head of the agut, resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the narrowness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these taravels in great number, which almost converge to the narrowness of each bone, until it is present to you in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of narrowness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of taravels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the taravel over the bone and revolves around it with the ties until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permits the taravel to another place, and pauses what is between all the tracts the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environs that.
And then you cut with incisions what is between each tract of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can put on it in the end of levitation, thus as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or hold your hand, or hold some other cause for some sturments which will apparel to that, thus as you have talons and forceps subtle.
And it is necessary that you keep with total caution so that the incision does not touch any cause of the cifac.
And thus when you have circuited the perforated bone, and it is separated from the cifac if it is continued in it, and you have extracted that, it is necessary that you make equal and engulfs that in the asperity of it from what is in the bone with another sturment similar to an incision, but more imperious than the others.
And if you find some small bones broken and crushed, then take that which is facilitating the instrument for removing the excess; and afterwards cure the wound with liniments and oils that they have applied.
And another manner of operation is to scrape, far from pain, which Galen and the wise men have written about in great detail; and this is their sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the broken bone in the part where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that broken bone and have placed it below the extremity of this instrument, slow and gentle, which is the form.
It is that the blunt break is gentle and does not cause any harm, and the acute break is from two lines before in length, thus sometimes; that the blunt break should be adjusted to the ciphac on the face of the acute break in the bone.
And then percussion is made on the instrument of a break with a small hammer until the entire bone is facilitated thus it revolves, and you should be careful of the bandage that does not touch the accident in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their lore; certainly, and if it was dormant.
When you find some additional cause attached to the bone of the bandage in certain places of the bone, you will cut away that part with the extremity of the instrument, and deliver it from being facilitated, because it is delivered from its pain and its suffering.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the bandage, and that which is cut off or removed from the bone is its surface, and you find it in its roughness and subtle breaks, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and eradicate those subtle breaks with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it may be possible to administer them at every convenient place according to their need and the most direct way of eradicating the broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary to administer in your razion where you scrape the bone at the beginning with the most subtle of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from that according to continuity until you reach administering the entire tone and the entire subtlety of all those.
Also in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have lost in order to reach rectification of it.
And it is a cause that has not been diminished regarding all those who have studied in that art. And we have written above what we have shown about great fractures.
And if the bandage is retracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosated oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rosated oil and place it over the primary cloth and do so that you may soothe it as much as possible, which does not irritate the ciphac; and then administer on that liament later, and do not stretch it unless for the quantity that the wound has so solely.
And leave that in this care for a day or two until you are sure of the apostema's caution; and then dislodge it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous dryness, thus with liniment of wine and flour of errs, and powder of senses and aristology, and similar to those.
And it is that you make of these powdered medicines that they be powdered over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property of which it is that they clean and do not bite.
And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and it should not be in the surdity of bad humor nor another; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the bandage of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with that malignant malice.
And it falls upon the ciphac of the head, as if the bone is mondified and majorly when the cure of it is impressed, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with the accidents that we have said, knowing that they are parnicious in all their aspects.
And if it does not fall black but from the medicine that is placed above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then it is necessary to take honey from one party and rosated oil parties three. and in those lines a cloth, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge until it is sanctified.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken except for two parties together, sometimes above, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not fall to it unless with attrition and tortuosity and sinuousness.
If one of the two broken parts is torn away, then it is necessary that you introduce the small finger into the wound, and that you reduce the fracture by bending it towards its natural shape, and with the small finger you feel beforehand, until it returns to its natural figure. It should be done for your ease, and beware that you do not fall into that pitfall during your operation on the patient's abdomen.
And if the fracture is in the upper broken part of the nose, and it does not appear there, then it is necessary that you equalize with the extremity of the rule on which the small protuberance grows.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make them resemble each other.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the sixth or seventh day in rest after the apostema's caution.
And introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth dipped in them, if the fracture is in one part, or two small calques, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be in the large calque as much as is needed to fill the hole of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers claimed that the calques were infused in broth, and were macerated for a whole day, but it was not seen by me; however, it is necessary that the piece be infused in album of egg white comforted with powder of millet; and then lay the calque until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened.
And some vegetables are introduced into the nose, in place of a calque, almost like a hen's egg that is wrapped in cloth dipped in lion's milk; and it should be that you already have the fracture of the nose strongly and that the patient is not prohibited from inhaling.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calques.
And if another apostema's caution occurs, apply the nose with wax or sewn in a vase of oil and rose oil, or with diacles.
If another apostema's caution does not occur, then it is necessary that you prepare it beforehand with flour of Sizami and powder of crushed hoof in egg white album; and then pause on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
If the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments or so comminuted, then it is necessary that you separate them from each other, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the suture, and cure it in a way that encarnates and consolidates, and apply a plaster convenient to it.
And if there is a festering wound on the nose, then it is necessary that you cure it with calques and administer poultices of lead until it is completely healthy.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not infected, consider then if the fracture is only slightly dislocated, and not broken into two and curved towards the inner parts, then its cognition is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce the small finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the small finger of your right hand; and impel it in that way to facilitate the reduction of the inner fracture, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; and thus you will equilibrate the fracture.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension of the two parts according to rectitude until it is possible to equalize them.
And if there is a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those with which you expect to remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause on the broken jawbone wax, and pause on the duplicated cloth, and pause on the large star-shaped decent cloth, or a piece of sole leather along the length of the jaw; and then tie it underneath according to how you have prepared the binding of it and that convenes the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and tranquilize, and pause the food of his swollen lips.
And if you expect that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then you take it out and dissolve it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and apply a plaster with powder of millet, egg white album, or flour of Sizami, since you will have removed the wax of it, and pause on the plastered lion.
And then how the annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it thus, so that it does not dissolve until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many vegetables are needed for this fracture to be strengthened in three weeks.
And if another affected area is seen, then administer what we have said in the treatment of their interior so that it may be healthy, and may remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is a painful plague, then consider whether it is a separated or displaced bone, then you subtly examine whether those displacements are what is convenient for the removal of those instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is narrow, then you amplify it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
And when you have finally removed those displacements, and none will remain there, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, pause on one of the instruments that are convenient for this and encrust it, until it may be healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is injured.
Many treatments are broken the furcula of the affected part before the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch displacements; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that it touches displacements, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a painful plague.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a painful plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and secures the broken furcula, and the other extends the vein to that affected part.
And then adjust the fracture with the tightness of the ties until it takes the shape of it according to its convexity, and it is not in a prominent position or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place underneath the patient's mattress a spatula of cloth or wool, and its greatness according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the furcula and shorten the spatula with your hand until it adjusts the fracture according to its convexity.
And if you cannot reach the extremity of the furcula to the affected parts before, because it is perverted to the chest, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place on the muscle of one thigh a larger cushion.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the affected parts underneath so that the bone of the furcula is elevated as it is in the chest, and then you straighten the fracture and adjust it with the tightness of the ties.
Moreover, if you feel displacements of the furcula and it is mauled, then it is necessary that you bend over it and extract those displacements to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the instruments that have been prepared for this, because you had placed underneath the furcula the instrument that serves the siphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron from which this is its form.
And it is similar to a spoon from which this is its concavity; and its width is according to what you have needed of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
Moreover, the length of it is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there are two extremities also at times, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you have extracted the displacement of the bone is wide, and yet secure from abscess caution, then you adjust the two lips of the plague with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess caution, then you fill the plague with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the plague.
And if you suspect abscess caution, then you put a warm dressing on it, with oil of roses and wine, and place it over that.
And you should not be afraid to put the star-shaped bandage over the broken bone; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or the star-shaped bandage is removed, then you rectify it and strengthen the joint.
And then stop the patient's sleep on their neck, and stop the tiny cushion under them from sleeping at night in a small space; so that it is elevated, the helper of theirs from the side of that, and thus the fracture of the ribcage is elevated by the muscle; or the arm of theirs is tied to the neck of that.
And do not loosen the ligament unless it becomes inflamed at the site of the injury or abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of theirs up to that point, and adjust it in the structure and restore it so that it is restored and the fracture of the ribcage is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some gentle remedies are made in some homes that are done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken in the broad part of theirs and it does not break unless at the edges.
And then when the part of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of theirs — and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you will prepare theirs and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way to make it as possible for you.
And then stop on the dusty place of many alum and stop the lion; and then stop powdered drap duplicated; and then stop on the star-shaped bandage of subtle table according to the quantity of the whole shoulder blade or a little more.
Perhaps if the star-shaped bandage is concave in some of the places of the shoulder blade, then you will fill that concavity with stoppers, and then push the star-shaped bandage according to equality.
And then strengthen it below with a long human chain against downward constriction and fasten the star-shaped bandage until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all gentle remedies that it is softened, another gentle remedy strengthens it and equalizes the star-shaped bandage if it is removed from its place.
And lift the patient over their own side there.
And the shoulder blade is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And then when this number is complete, then you will dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is one of the bones which from the beginning was not bruised nor dissolved.
And if you proceed with the place of the bone's step and put there the splint, then you will bind over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the ribcage from sadness of abscess, beware that it does not become inflamed here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot, some gentle remedies are broken in the middle part of it and that ends there; perhaps the extremities of its motion end there, which are weakened and comminuted.
And from the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the divided parts and becomes inflamed with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and weakness, and faintness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be resupinated on their own back, and stopped between the shoulder blades with a cushion; and then pressed into the muscles of theirs, and adjusted the ribs of theirs with two rib-ends, and subtly operated on it in the operation and in the equalization according to every way that is possible and that converges to it, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
And then stop on the plaster and stop and stop above the star-shaped bandage of subtle table of gypsum or of chalk and of its similar levitation, since you will envelop that in drap; and then subtly operate on that above the broken bone so it is not loosened; and go with the joint according to retonditat on the back with some gentle remedies, and strengthen that with downward constriction; and then consider the joint at every hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
And if necessary, provoke the dislocation of that from corrosion or putrefaction, or pain, or abscess that becomes inflamed in the place, then you will cut and dissect that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what becomes inflamed for it in every way of cure; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is against that face; and adjust to its constriction until it is healthy.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not happen unless in gross places that follow the back; and from the extremities of their departure, they do not become inflamed unless for that reason which is cartilaginous. The knowledge of it is not concealed from the feeling that gives insight into the inquiry of the patient's words.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that it envelops the fracture of the words according to the possible manner, until it is enveloped as it convalesces, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if it is necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, then it gives rise to vehement pain and puncture, just as puncture that gives rise to one who has suffered a fall, and for this reason the bone puts forth swelling; and it gives rise to difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antics are skillfully employed in that which has many skilled hands.
And of theirs, thus they say: it is necessary to pause the windings of the patient that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture may be pushed towards the fore parts.
We have avoided that so it may not cause the gathering of bad humors, lest it generates a severe abscess; and if it has already gathered, then it helps towards that.
And they discovered some of theirs who had paused beneath the windows and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, but I, the emperor, am afraid that the wind will attract the excesses to the place of debility.
And they discovered some of theirs: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and then pause powders between the ribs until it is filled, so that it may be the binding that envelops it according to the art; and then the patient should be cured with a cure of poultices of wind and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction of the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth swelling with puncture in the finger, I think about the patient, then it is necessary to bend over the place, uncover the broken rib, and then pause above that instrument that preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which precedes, and that inserts the bone with facility, and extracts that.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a binding, and heal it with plasters until it is healthy.
And if it gathers internally to form an abscess, then you should apply a cushion and pour powders into hot rose oil and pause over the place, and that the patient should be cured with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
And let it be raised above the mattress on which one sleeps, until it is healthy.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine, ribs, and neck.
Some have seen that fractures of the neck bones are similar to those of the spine, and likewise they attribute it to their artifice, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And with this they gather to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider, because many times the sick ones are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when they constrict those with the strings of words or pierce those with a needle and do not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healthy, and among the same dispositions it is mortal.
And if it moves those and feels in those constrictions with the words and puncture, then you know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with a cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and want to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider its weight.
Then if you see that it is already mollified, it gathers to those who have fallen into the same, and then when you sit on the sick back, you feel windiness and egestation according to its will, and some have seen that it is raised above the sick back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not trouble yourself with its cure.
We have seen that no cause of those gathers, the cause is worse and purer evil.
And the cure of it is that you perform a sedation of the abscess with hot rose oil poured over the affected spine, or with mugwort roots of huile; pause on that for some seen days until the abscess is sedated.
And then pause with one of the comforting and exiting plasters, and strengthen it with a lien on that; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected part where it hurts until it is healthy.
And if it gathers from the artifice of the satiating bones or some cause that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to suck on the codeine and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then heal it with an encarnation of the enguentz, until it is healthy.
We have seen that the rear of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coeta, then it is necessary that you enter the finger of your left hand into the back, and envelop the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary equilibrium; and then pause on it with a plaster and astelha, if it is necessary for those, and then strengthen that.
If you feel stagnant humors in the patient, then put your finger on that area, and apply heat to it, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrow passage.
The bones of the narrow passages are so fragile, and if they break, then the fracture is only communicated to the extremities of those and are hidden in their length and decline towards the divided parts; and it adds to the bad pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is broken.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is on the fracture which is its figure.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you bandage it according to how it appears to you by equalizing the bandage until it is assembled to its natural figure.
Moreover if the fracture is in the groin or it declines towards the lower parts, then you make a soft bed on the patient's belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have bandaged it, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or of cane over it, and tighten it with a strict compression so that there is no puncture of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
And bandage the concavity so that it fills it until it takes the compression according to equality, and order the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Moreover if an abscess forms cautiously, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is settled cautiously, and place over it what settles according to what precedes; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen it thus as a covering.
And if they are stagnant humors in the bones or they are communicated, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
The hip joint is that which is between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a wooden board placed on the middle of the groin according to this form:
And there are two ligaments in two extremities, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
And the patient lies on a seat; and then you place the broken arm on the wooden board until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
And then you suspend it on some heavy cause or the master extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor examines whether the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that the patient is placed on their back and suspends their hand with the collarbone ligament; and then you order two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds it below; and each of them extends to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with ligaments and over that with another ligament, and each of the two servants extends to their respective parts.
And then if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it is suitable to place half of the ligament on the tip and the other below the fracture towards the thigh.
And similarly if the fracture is near the thigh, then it is suitable to place the ligament on that place and on that thigh.
Bandage it with facilitated and easy treatment, and then when it is bandaged according to what is suitable and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if there is no cautious abscess.
Moreover if there is a cautious abscess, then loosen the compression until the seventh day, and place on it a lane of warm oil or rose oil until it reduces the abscess, and then you strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then you place an envelopment of new cloth over the plaster; and then you adjust the arm over that hip joint, and place your hand firmly over the patient's muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the hip joint the arm so that the arm is in its proper place, if it doesn't prohibit anything from some cause of the broken bone.
And then it uses its own strength.
And it is that which places on the fracture that strength which is more relaxed and stronger than the other strengths; and place between each strength the latitude of the finger, and let the length of the strengths be according to the breaking with an addition of three fingers of the whole part.
And then strengthen over the strengths with the compression which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your compression over the place of the fracture should be more taut. And when the pus has been drained from the fracture, it is the minor structure.
And so if you observe the positioning of the stars and the structure likewise as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess forming, then place the structure and the stars inside until day seven, likewise as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen at the place of injury; or it is prohibited to allow food to reach the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their mattress be above the stomach.
And place a warm dressing full of wool over the affected area, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify everything with your true virtue.
And place the patient's food in order as we have pointed out to you, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover that you increase the patient's food.
Because it is customary for the affected area and the patient's leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is seen that they are released and bathed and medicated with ointments that rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly bruised, then do not release the ligament and the stars until a month or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two forearm bones; one of them is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
And sometimes the major forearm bone alone is broken, or the small one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
And when the small forearm bone is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when the forearm bone is broken above the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to apply a small extension to facilitate its healing.
But if the large forearm bone is broken, then it is necessary to apply a stronger extension.
And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you apply a much stronger traction.
And it is necessary that you maintain the figure of the hand from the restoration of it and the extension of it stretched out on a cushion, and let the palm of the hand be above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a low chair.
And let there be a cushion underneath it in its height or width, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
And then the minister extends the arm from the affected part down to the healthy hand or ligament, and another minister extends it similarly from above.
And then the doctor sets the bone in place so that it returns to its best figure as much as possible.
And if the fracture of the bone is dislocated, then you should return to put everything in its original place with your true virtue.
And if it appears in the separated dislocation that the code is broken and it is not according to your hope for its restoration, then finish with it and leave it as it was, according to the manner which we have said above.
But if the fracture is a plague, I have already made a special chapter for that, and so take care of it.
And if you fear an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, and be careful between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it with subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the wax and place an emplaster prepared from powder of molled clay, and afterwards place stars; and let the star that is placed above that fracture be firm and strong.
And know that the name of the stars of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or in both bones together.
And then place your structure over the location of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it is more certain, extend it to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, place the structure a little more softly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the wrapping cloths that are applied over the fracture should not be too humid or too dry, and they must be strengthened with a subtle and coarse mixture, so that we have recommended it between subtlety and grossness.
Examine the limb and its ligament for several days. And if you find some cause that requires correction, then apply the correction to the limb, and then wrap the limb with hot water until the correction is complete.
And leave the limb unrestrained until it rests, and then restore its structure.
And if the extraction is softened and the bone is re-aligned and similar to those, then correct all that with your true virtue.
And consider more that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excess of structure, so then wrap it tightly for a few days until it corrodes and then strengthen it.
Moreover, if the patient does not find any of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not suitable to delay until about 20 days or around that time.
And then the hand of the patient should be suspended for its true virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or at least it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
You will know that the thumb and fingers do not easily receive fractures, and they do not have sinews unless with very slow movements.
And when the hand receives a fracture or injury, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight and level path, according to equality, and then pause the hand of the patient on that extension.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor joins them together so that they are properly connected in good connection.
And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, unless an abscess should be cauterized; and then place a star-shaped dressing according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Moreover, if the splint is in the divided parts of the belly of the palm, and then make it resemble a spear of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their splinted palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the star-shaped dressing of the heart be in the cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body can be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Moreover, if the fracture is in the forepart, then it is necessary to place a star-shaped dressing above and another star-shaped dressing below on the palm, so that the hand can be restored and straightened; and then pause the structure, just as the hand is revolved to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the fingers, then it is a small finger, joined according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, place a small straightened star-shaped dressing so that the fracture is elevated and not hindered.
Moreover, if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be joined and tied to the finger itself; or all the joints according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star-shaped dressing, just as we have said in the small finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess cauterization and opposition — in the tie-up operation — in what is necessary when you find some cause of those, according to what is reiterated in the narrative of it.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip is broken and declared to the sense according to what is converted to the part above and to the underlying pus.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Moreover, if it is properly joined to the root of the hip, then the ligament is properly joined above to the part of the pelvis, so that the extension remains in its place, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is properly joined above, then make the ligament properly joined above, and let the extension be in the parts below.
And then the doctor joins the bone in both its sockets more inward so that it reduces to its natural semblance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and structure, unless an abscess should be found in the limb. Sometimes, if there is an abscess in the aposteme, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has been drained, and then return to your usual care.
The structure of the fracture should be made thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove the superfluous; and then cover the leg up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long filament between the thigh and the leg near the knee, and wrap the extremities of the filament around the two parts above, and then roll it over the leg and the thigh so that it does not slip out of the bandage.
And then stop on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus far, and place one star on the bone of the leg.
And then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh with many cloths, so that the structure is consolidated.
And then begin a strong structure from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have already aligned yourself to the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure should be less and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two extremities of the filament to the lower parts until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the stars on the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its own place.
And then leave the structure on that, so that it does not cause corrosion to the member or abscess or inflammation and appears similar to those; and if any of these causes occur, then cut away from that, and correct what has been done wrongly, according to what we have said many times.
Sometimes if there is a fracture in the bone which has fallen, then cover it so that you hold it together according to what is possible for you; and if not, put something over it and retain it, and care for what precedes the memory until it is healed.
And several times it is strengthened, this fracture of the thigh or other that are adjusted to the stars, thus as we have said in the auxiliary and in the arm.
Sometimes in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not cause malnutrition and lameness; and if it is restored alone, or another that has been applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it be limping from what was previously.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the wheelbone of the knee.
You know that a fracture of the kneecap is difficult to heal, and sometimes it causes many painful troubles.
Sometimes it happens to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all this has been said with sadness.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it should be reunited with what has been broken off from its parts, and gathered together again as much as possible, according to equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
And then stop the plaster and place it around that round star, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure convenient for that.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus as abscess and similar to those in which it is opposed to every accident in what is convenient for it to be healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is large and is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle and is called ankle.
And it happens to some species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm jointly, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, it is destroyed below, and it is one of those causes that are not easily mended.
And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligamentation of the stars according to that joint.
Sometimes, however, it happens that the fracture of the leg has many rough edges, which should be made smoother and lighter, and alleviated with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you join the stars and complete all the tie of the operation, then you take measures from the wood of pine which has been placed below the causes that were placed in solitude; and make a session of branches of palm; alleviate those from the ones that are small and rough, and not be grasped by the handles, and be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee down to the heel.
And then envelop each drap with two enveloping cloths according to the length of it, and place one over the division of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so also below the toes to the base of the foot.
And also bind the two stilhes in three places of the extremities and at the middle location, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right and left side, and it stays in good station.
And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
And mostly be careful that you do this in a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you guard against aposteme and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, then apply to him that which is needed to enter so that it may be healed.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
The ankle does not always suffer a complete fracture; rather the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fracture, and do not suffer it unless they are in a position of bad alignment.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient places his foot on the prepared ground in this way as if anointed.
And then place one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and enclose those so that they return to their places.
And then apply an emplaster and stop above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
And then strengthen that around the foot in descending structure, because you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which it is worthy.
And when it passes three or four days, then you loosen the binding, because you will find the bones reunited, or reset or relocated, and the operation on those is thus as if experienced.
But if some toes are reset, then restore those, and reunite them thus as you have and recommended to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then place the reset toe stilhes according to the length of the toe, and it will be placed a little above one foot; and then place below the foot this table which you have recommended, and strengthen that around the structure descending.
But if that which is reset of the bones is two or three or more, then you place above each toe stilhes according to their quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and it stands on one of the plates of the table near the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have said to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply to every accident what is needed.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of the hip joint of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the rod of the man.
When the hip joint of the woman is reset, then make that descend in that seated position, and then incline it towards the division of the two a little, and it will be held back.
And then the midwife supports the hip joint from below, and it is done in the hip joint of him thus as expected; and then the woman will be comforted, and raises her back a little at a time, because all that is forgotten until it is demonstrated before the division of the hip joint thus as expected and the reset bone returns.
And then place pillows on his back, and when he wants to urinate, remain at the bottom with facilitated ease and then urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you started, and then return to his first pillow.
And do thus for seven days or around those, because it is restored.
And if you want, take once an ovula of egg and strengthen on the trauc of him a cane of cane; and insert all the bladder into his hip joint, and then sufflate in the cane with virtue until the bladder is inflated within the hip joint, because the fracture returns.
And then it will be filled from below and stayed for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of man or woman is reset, then administer in the restoration and adjustment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few happen, mostly to he who has some study and use and intend my free book; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via directness in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
More in the verve of man when he is wounded, take a poultice of duck, and put the verve in that; and then pause over the wrapping of cloth, and it will be wrapped, and then it will be laid aside for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are badly bruised.
It is convenient for that which suffers a fracture and bruising, and it is even more so if the bone is large, thus like the bone of the hip or of the joint, or similar to that, that you take care and prepare the conditions of healing as much as possible, since they have been said above.
And if the bruising flows with blood, then it is necessary that you take care of retaining it in such a way that you dust over the injured place with powder, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you delay the restoration of it until the sixth day, until the abscess is calmed down, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, because you will cause a worse accident.
But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers as much as possible, in a facilitating and gentle extension.
But if the extension is not prepared by your fingers, then you reduce it with your fingers as much as possible to this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight inches and its width is according to the quantity of the bruise; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take hold of these three or four according to the quantity that indicates to him in the cure of all kinds of fractures.
And it should be rounded, and it should be in a gentle groove so that it is not doubled back during the operation hour.
And it should be of acute extremity where the margin is in the hollows of the extremities; and it should be the underside of it with a gross tendon tending, and of its majesty within the parts.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", thus it is a gentle spatula.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevation be paused above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And push it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it will be enclosed with some balance.
And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone in every way that we have recommended, then you should insert it in one of the instruments that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And then return to those who remain in the bone of roughness and of subtle scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the patient of vehement pain ledent, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer with the patient for great joy.
When your restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in seven stipulations of black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the bruise or any other cause in which there may be oil, so that it does not become acidic and corrupted.
And then administer stellar remedies at the time of the complete compliment of the bone restoration, and leave the uncovered bruise in such a way that you insert the tube with forceps and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the bruise.
And beware that you do not strengthen the bruise on the fracture, because many vain efforts are made by foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting mortification or gangrene, so it is sanity. And if the strict structure loosens, softens, and differs from the structure of other fractures.
And if the bruise is great or is a bad bruise, and you fear about those evil accidents which we have recommended, and it brings pain in that place, then it does not behoove to pause over those stellar remedies, but rather make use of those wrapping cloths instead of stellar remedies and strengthen it with those.
And when one or two days have passed since the bruise began, which in it has generated a branch, then you remove from underneath the cloth that you had paused over it for six, and then administer some warm poultices, applying those of our customary usage, which is to medicate the bruises, thus applying tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
It is convenient for you to remove the ligament and consider the plague in each day, morning and evening, until it is consolidated and stabilized, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the purging of the bad humor from the patient is facilitated.
If the plague passes several days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed in the arm, then you will know that here are satiating of the small medicines because they inquire into the plague to try. And of those satiating medicines, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated from their place and put the member to make pain worse, therefore you should insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if the plague is acute or chronic, it is stubborn, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you know that one of those is what is convenient for him in the cure of which a preceding narration was made in the seventh chapter.
And of this, you know that it is my best sermon and you make present your passion: when the gross is trimmed, emphasize on the member thus like the bones of the thigh and of the helper, and seem similar to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it, because four motives are avoided, which accelerate death; having laid aside that within, which you will purify, for if strong it will be for 20 days or more. And then the plague is cured if you have seen it, and if not, you will not leave it there.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of numbness that occurs in the residue of some fracture.
Many avoided accidents occur with this numbness in the residue of healing from fracture, and it is major because it is close to the joints, and it is obstructed by the figure of the member; and therefore it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the numbness is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipulated thus as aloes, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and seem similar to those; also take some or all of them, and compound them so they are stipulated, or album of huou, or agree, and place it on the numbness in this stop, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
And leave the extrication that does not dislodge it for several days; and then dislodge it and iterate another, until the numbness is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead descent, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
Moreover, if the numbness is already converted into stone and strengthened, it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contrition, and then separate it from the superior part of the member, and remove the superfluity and eminence, or scrape that with certain remedies until it is removed; and cure it so that it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then returns the subtle member to its natural freedom, following the seven natural principles.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returns the subtle member to its natural freedom, then it is not done except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of the joint not according to what is known; or due to superfluity of structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or due to multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to superfluous movement not in its hour; or due to paucity of health in the body of the patient and debilitation of it.
And the cure of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put gauges and lotions on them.
And then pause the poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the most nourishment, or continues to embrocate them with warm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of trimmed bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is known.
When it occurs to the member already restored with health from tortuousness and eminence to the trimmed bone and numbness, and it is for this fed in the form of the member, but meanwhile the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you do not know that you receive the word of him who exists as that member being newly trimmed.
Moreover, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very detestable, producing great terror in the sign of which it is mortal.
Moreover, if the numbness and fracture are recent, then you know that they are embrocated with warm water in which they collect softening herbs, thus like they are fueled by altea and radish of it, and mellilot, and seem similar to those; and make a plaster on it with mollifying plaster thus like dyallaquilon is well done; or take mucilage of radish of altea and be continued in gray of gualina or oil of cirami, and be plastered on that; or take fat figs and be trissaded on the colom, and seem similar to those of the medicines that are named asermann's consolidation.
And some medications are dissolved in a continuous friction that is applied to the most humid parts of the body, and they should be administered with gentle movements of the limbs throughout the day.
Perhaps it is twisted and has gone inside and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked the need for iron therapy, then it is necessary to remove the pus that has accumulated there and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised so that what is superfluous in the node of that meter in the bone is excised with subtle incisions, and it is facilitated by ease in that sollicitated and studied area.
Chapter 23.
About sermon on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the shape of the limb is altered, and it causes great pains and lesions.
Therefore, when accidents occur due to a dislocation, it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay it, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and strongly adheres, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason it is necessary to massage neither strongly nor gently at the time of inflammation, because many vigorous manipulations bring about spasm and severe pains.
Perhaps when it happens, it is necessary to apply yourself to the flaccidity of the affected part, and then let it rest so that the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be wrapped in warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced with ease.
And the whole limb should be cured with the water of which the memory will come back to its place.
And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with little movement, and so mollified a little; or they are completely dislocated and complicated, until they are mollified at the joint, so that saliva flows from the affected part and it cannot hold nor open its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped in its speech.
Perhaps when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major arrangements it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Perhaps if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary to administer reduction of it immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the affected part, and inserts his finger into the mouth to feel the root of the dislocated jawbone, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are placed on the other parts of the body which are swollen; and he commands the patient to relax his jaws and release them from any part; and the minister feels the jawbone and pulls it back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy and does not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And then when they are returned and set in place, and the mouth of the affected part is closed and not mollified, then apply the powder of wax and cerate on those areas, and it will be made with wax and oil rosated; and then it will be tied with facilitation and gentle movements.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be positioned between two pillows, so that it does not incline to the right or left side; and do not force him to eat anything for a certain time; having forbidden him wine for a long time, until when the pains are mollified and the jawbones are numbed, then he can have what he wants.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not bother about the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and citation, until the jawbone is numbed and healed.
And if the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not convert to their proper places, then many vigorous manipulations happen with fever and continuous sweat, and strongly irritates the belly of the affected part, and strongly irritates and vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many vigorous deaths occur to those to whom this happens in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of dislocation of the ankle and extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from the foot because of its continuity with the foot; and some vigorous manipulations are dislocated to the front part, and this is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his swollen arms. Then place your hand firmly on the area with your palm, for it will return strongly.
And then pause over that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
May the extremity of the one who has the hernia and continues on it, not be dislocated any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and restored according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
And then pause over that plaster, and powders, and extraction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this manner the cure is reduced, the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the top of the thigh to the bottom.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and therefore exits below the thighs, and mostly in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where the flesh is thick, it is difficult to exit.
And often accidents happen to some men through percussion or fall, and the muscle of it is inflamed with a hot aposteme, and it is bruised because it has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you sprinkle something on it until you are certain of its condition, and then proceed with the cure of it.
And it is known that the dislocation of it is at the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them diverse manifest differences; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the thigh the sign of the head of the muscle as if it were a vacuum, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to its proper position, nor can he do it with all movements.
If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you will find a manifest sign, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; and then pauses with the fingers placed below the thigh, and strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends it thus; and then pauses it below so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water and be given an embrocation that softens and loosens as if it were a poultice of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on his back and paused below the thigh, waiting for a day that it is restored between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor pauses the whole talo over the spine, and raises the head of the muscle in a circle, and holds the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not hidden at the parts below, because it returns thus to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make yourself present as a man who has been placed longer than the patient, and stands on one side of the bed, and inserts his hand below the thigh of the patient and raises the thigh above to the parts so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below the belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that it weighs on that, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in this way: and it is that a long stick is fixed on the ground with a rounded head of figure, like a pile of mortar, not too big or subtle, and then paused below the patient; because being placed over the head of the stick, the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then extended his hand to the parts below the other part; and the body is strengthened from the other part in fortitude, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity which is in length of two arms, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the surface of the thigh according to this form.
And place above the reddened skin a cloth soaked in warm lion's milk, so that it does not harm the patient.
And place the patient's small intestine in its proper position, and stretch out your hand or arm over the joint towards the divisions above, and place the joint over the adjuster and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And place the arm on a scale of steps according to the latitude, and the hand is stretched out towards the divisions above, and the other thing is suspended from the other part, so that the inner joint is straightened as much as possible.
And when the instrument is complete according to whatever method you can, and then cover it so that you pause below the small intestine with a quantity of wool equal in weight; and place a plaster prepared with powder of moly and album of wolf on all the muscles, thus that it is revolved from above, and place strength below the small intestine with decent structure; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of it is annexed to the neck of it, and let it be, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
And cover that the food of the patient is paused for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring health to him.
And then the food is given more abundantly after seven or eight days, and an exercise of movement is done; and thus if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated often due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then cover that in that case there should be administered a cautery with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days are elapsed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and structure are reduced over certain affected areas, and it is not strengthened and can't be elevated to the parts above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the feet and knees or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns to its place.
And another structure should be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it affects the healing gravitating in the member and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many affected areas until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls below the vein or below the touch according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, that is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the underlying muscle.
And you know that the hips, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible from the front before it comes to the apostema of the hip, because if it comes to the apostema of the hip, difficult is the reduction of it, and often it is not healed at all; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of major pain, and many affected areas are dying from that.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two fingers, and its arm should be expanded, and the fingers of the metacarpus are placed above the hip and below it, and the joints are fixed in the hollows of their own fingers, or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns also so that it bends the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and very strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then the arm is revolved from all parts, because it is enveloped in a doubled cloth over its hand, or ligament.
And when the metacarpus touches the joint with its hand, until then some oil is poured for so that it helps in lubricating the joint and facilitating; and then fix the joint with a strong push until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is covered by placing it on a plaster in which it is stipulated and excised with album of wolf, and it is strengthened in a decent structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and let it be for some days.
And then it is released; and so if the joint is formed in the same place, then you release the bandage of it and let it be like that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you iterate the plaster and bandage, and let it be like that for several days until it is externalized; and then release it.
Maybe it happens to him by gravity towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humid heat in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place a cushion on the alleviated joint, so it is not bothered by excessive motion; and then it is tied, and let it be like that over the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it sweats, then you warm the joint with tempered friction, and then place it over the alleviated one, so it is rounded by motion, one time, and the second, and the third. in a wrapping of bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you want, place on that wound of humid and scaled skin with a bandage and strengthen over it; and do that several times, because that is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter 28.
About the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
A shoulder that has some veins is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the opposite is for other joints, but mainly because it needs velocity in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, so long as the place is apostematized or it doesn't happen to it an apostemic affection.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's arm on a table and the doctor extends his arm, and he places his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its own place.
Maybe it is necessary to consider if the palm has been stayed against the belly of the arm, then the patient places his back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding over the back of the arm, then the position of the doctor's hand is intrinsically above the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over that prominence of the joint.
And then if it returns soon, good is; and if not, then strengthen that with an emplaster at once the apostema and let it be like that; and do not iterate that, because if not, you will not suffer nor be able to put on the reduction of it, since it passes into its days.
Maybe the joint is Roman according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, but that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the sake of its treatment and fortifying its confidence in some cause.
Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the emplaster which we have recommended, and let it be like that and strengthened for five days; and then release it and let it be like that and the hand of it should be exercised.
Maybe if the movement of it is stayed and happens to it some gravity, then you warm that with hot water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
About the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Several times it happens that the toes are dislocated completely.
And when some of those toes are dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then hold the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied fingers, until it returns.
And then sustain the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be like that for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its own day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to release it during the day and exercise its movement, and bind it at night; and do that for several days until it is strengthened.
And do similarly to that, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and do that first operation on the injured toe, until it is healed.
And similarly do that when it is dislocated at other parts.
Chapter 30.
About the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to some of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
And it is said that the evacuation of the patient is out of their will, and they cannot retain it; and many times some members of it are mollified or two heads of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times it is done the removal of it in four parts.
Therefore, it has been decided that the affected parts behind are numbness and are called geltosity.
The treatment of it is that sometimes you should consider whether the geltosity comes from poverty, because sometimes there is no cure for it nor any healing of all.
Maybe in this case you see by chance or by percussion or by similarity to those, the Ancients had manners of treatment in sermons very prolix, from which the most returns to profit; maybe you have already heard about that one from whom little is known of his tropism, due to his proximity to my intention, in which he has expounded and formed diverse instruments of that, with which I will show and expound it.
And of those, none are cured except the one that comes from the back properly, just as I recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face over a soft pillow near the wall, and should be extended with his extremities mollified so that the foot of the patient is not lifted.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the bed near the patient's head, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bed.
And one minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then envelop over the patient's head and below tighten the little linen band firmly; and extend the extremity of the linen to the stick which is above their head, and tie it on them; and then strengthen the other band around their hips, and above their legs; and then adjust all the bands and tie them on the other stick which is above their feet.
And then the minister should carefully extend the band to the part of the stick, and they should not be numbness in the two sticks and the bands from their own places where they are fixed, maybe however they will not be firm as we have said.
And the doctor puts his palms on the spine with strong pressure until it returns, or puts on that one table, and then adjusts on the table their own feet until it returns.
Maybe if it does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air of three arms, and dig into the wall where we have said that it is near the patient, a place where the extremity of the table enters. And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor puts his feet on the other extremity, and stretches well until the spine is constricted and returns to its own place.
And if you want, remove what is revolving in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground above the patient's head at the back of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and above their head at the back of the bed also two sticks; and let the length be between each stick a palm, and already it is done in each stick through which the course is turned, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round stick in which the course is turned, and let it be revolving in the two tracks of the two sticks.
And at the extremity of it there is a track in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is revolving; and in the two other sticks it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the bands that have been stretched on the feet of the patient in the track which is above their head, and the bands that have been stretched on their thighs in the course which is above their feet.
And then there will be each course and there will be a minister who turns the course with their hand, and the doctor will straighten the spine according to what we have said.
And then because the spine has returned, and the place is straightened, then it is necessary that you put a plaster exciccatiu on the album of Huou, and then stop; and then put on the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around them, and its length is as much as the place of the geltosity, and above the part of the spine.
And then it should be tied with the band that we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until they are healthy.
And if there remains some impediment in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines which mollify and liniscan are administered with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a lamina of lead.
And some evacuated humors accumulate in the back of the two spines, and it is gathered for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already has been minimized so that it does not converge to make a prosompcio with this medicine, because it will strongly contradict you to come to that mort.
Chapter 31.
About the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not simply dislocate, but rather it is because of something that happens to those joints with small movements and cavities.
And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, either it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And mostly it is dislocated inward, and rarely outward or forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation inward is this: when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to match the sick one, it is then longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick leg cannot bend its knee towards the shin, and it is in that place where the shin bone is displaced from its proper position, so that the head of the thigh bone has deviated here.
And the sign of that one which is subject to outward dislocation is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one which is subject to forward dislocation is that it expands the leg according to its natural tendency, but it cannot bend because of the pain in the shin, and if you try to walk and cannot put weight on it forward; and its urine is retained and its knee is displaced, and its walking is impaired on the ankle.
And the sign of that one which is subject to backward dislocation is that it does not expand the shin, nor can it bend forward because the knee cannot bend, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the knee is weakened, and the head of the thigh bone is out of place.
The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and chronic, that it has already become accustomed to having it, you will administer reduction of it according to its disposition, then it is not in total cure; and therefore it does not seem that there can be perfect recovery.
But in that one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you will find what you need to return the joint and extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left, so that it returns strongly and does not require another cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you need to prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the part that is below, or with its own muscles, or with the ligament that is tied above the shin; and another minister extends the hand of that one downwards so that it reaches the muscles below the thighs; and you strengthen the ligament on the joint of the thigh bone, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
And its extension is from the ankle to the knee, or from the inward part to the outward part, or from the backward part to the forward part.
And its extension is all of these in one way so that the sick leg is elevated above the level of the ground and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we spoke of in the proper cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is inward, you need to resupinate the sick leg above the healthy one; and then pause the ligaments on the joint of the thigh bone in that place where the head of the thigh bone is between the shin and the knee; and then extend the ligament from the part of the knee to the outward part of the furcula.
And then another strong minister takes the arms of it, and firmly grasps the large joint of the sick thigh and extends outward with vigorous extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
And this species is of the most gentle cure in which this member is reduced, unlike the other species.
But if it is exhausted above you and does not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then you need to tie the two feet of the sick leg together with a strong ligament, gently, above both ankles and both shins.
And its length is of each one according to the quantity of four fingers, and the sick leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the sick leg is suspended above the head of the beam, and it is in the pulley; and its length from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh bone, and it is suspended with the sick leg another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh bone in strong empowerment, so that the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
Most in the reduction proper, when it is dislocation at the fore part, it happens that the patient leans over a support according to what we have recommended in having gelatinized; and strengthen the ligament over the affected leg properly and over their chest.
And place two pads, one on their feet, and the other on their head; and place two adjusted pads on the middle of the affected joint, over which the humors are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pad being between their thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts does not become twisted.
And each minister extends to their own part, and the doctor has their hand engaged in the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the lower parts, then it happens that the leg is extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on the joint; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected side, and then cuts off that hand with the other hand, and in that cutting off, they pause the extension to the lower parts at the part of the ankle.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts, then it does not happen that the patient is extended to the lower parts, and it is elevated above the ground; however, it happens that they are placed on a hard surface, thus as it happens with the examination if their ankle is dislocated at the fore part, according to what we have said about the setting of them on two ankles; and it is on their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
And it happens that an administered compression is applied to the table on the area where the joint is located.
Then, since the reduction is completed as it happens — and the sign of the reduction of them is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches out their leg and expands those excuses, then you know that the member has returned to its place — and then you adjust both thighs and place a bandage and stretch on a splint so that the ankle does not become dislocated in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore the patient can walk again.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and leave it for three days.
And then release it, and make it wait in ambulation over some crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the Cure of Dislocation of the Ankle.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated at the fore parts, and at the hind parts, and sometimes at the lower parts more than at the upper parts; and at the lower parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you order the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient straight, thus they extend their leg, if possible; tie the two to the face of it, and place their foot between the two feet; and then make them hold the ankle with both palms, and retain those between the two fingers on the ankle with strength, and another minister extends the affected foot until the ankle returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh without labor or effort.
And then apply that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
And do not allow the patient to walk about for some days, until they are healthy and comforted.
Most of the reduction of it is excused, then you must strongly extend the ligaments in the cure of the preceding narrative on the treatment of the hand.
Chapter 33.
On the Cure of Dislocation of the Ankle.
The ankle sometimes is removed by small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either at the hind parts or at the fore parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
The cure of the patient's movement is to reduce fatigue, and it is necessary that it be extended with facilitated movements and enclosed within so that it returns.
In the cure of one who is dislocated according to complement, it behooves that you straighten the patient's right side, and hold that strong and valiant minister behind the back of that one in the middle place of theirs.
And then you put your right hand on the upper part of the foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the place of the calf.
And then you pull the foot with your right hand, and place your left hand for two fingers' width, and stretch out your left hand; and you bend the foot's toes towards the leg's knee.
And make two finger-widths according to what we have measured.
And then you bend the foot's toes towards the third finger-width, and you are at the calf.
So if it returns to one finger-width or two according to this method, and if you find the foot enclosed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because that returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and stretch out a blanket firmly fixed to the earth, and enclose it between the patient's thighs, and you have already enveloped it with a cloth so that the patient does not escape.
And the minister of theirs holds their thighs, and another minister stretches out the foot with their hands or on the collar of the foot; and then stretch out that certain minister against extension of the back part, and the blanket is stretched out between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of theirs is not attracted to the lower parts from their extension.
And the doctor encloses the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place with ease.
And thus when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of theirs, then pause the plaster and stretch out that strongly with the bandage, and tie the foot to the leg.
And it behooves that you fear or guard against the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage on that is not violent and holds that strongly.
And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch it out.
And then remove it on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not dissolve and corrupt on them, and then that which does not receive cure.
And if you happen to find a postrema wound, then it behooves that you administer in the cadence of theirs what precedes our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is remedied.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It behooves that what is dislocated be enclosed with little extension of its knees; and that which is not difficult, it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then it behooves that you straighten the patient's foot on the ground or on a table, and it should be standing thus as if it were walking.
And then you stand on your feet, and pause the foot on what is imagined of the joints, and then calcify that with your foot in a upright position until it returns, and see that it is already enclosed and does not appear in the prominent place.
And then pause below the belly of their foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then stretch it with decent structure and firmness for three days; and then remove it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the species of dislocation that are made with plague or fracture or some other evil signs.
When you happen upon any of those causes, and you fail in the cure of that and in the restoration of theirs, many finger-widths succeed in bringing about death.
And for that it does not behoove to presume about the cure of theirs, except he who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and pitiful, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that heal apostemas so well, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but to him from whom you hope for salvation, from alleviation of evil, and in which appears some hope. And then it is necessary to hasten so much to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, lest an apostema wound occurs.
And then if the limb returns to its desired position, then administer careful regulation, which will cure the wound and heal the plague that is convenient for him from the swelling of the affected parts.
And if the dislocation is a fracture and it happens in the separated bones of the sacrum, then you perforate their statement, and make it so that we have said in the simple cases of this type that it is preceded in those places.
And beware and flee according to your virtue from the instrument of fear through the ways which are shown to you as it was preceded by my prediction; for it is better for you to give thanks to your Creator, and may it be more permanent in your glory, and may there be more salutations to your body verily in that time. Thus you will finish the prayers of Albucasim, perfectly fulfilling those which God may bless. Amen.
