Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because it follows from its conclusion to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that you should complete that in you and this treatise, which is a part of surgical operation with my own hands.
Since the surgical operation with my own hands is almost extinct in our region and in our time, to the point that little remains of its science, and its practice is obscure; and there are hardly any descriptions of it left in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted and distorted by those errors and misunderstandings to the point that the intentions of it are sealed and the force of it and the art have been stretched.
And it seems to me that you should revitalize that order of this treatise through the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for the purpose of adding the forms of instruments such as cauteries and other tools of the craft, so that it may be added to the declaration and prepared in advance, which is necessary.
But the reason why one cannot find a good craftsman with his own hands in our time is because the art of medicine is lengthy, and one's actor must be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen knew so well that he could recognize the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and the arrangement of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their effusion.
And therefore I say with Hippocrates that a name is but a sound, much more in the small work and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said this about him in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable in anatomy as we have taught it will not be spared from falling into error by which men are killed, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and take themselves out of that science and its experiments.
For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who inserted an abscess in the throat of a woman, and cut some arteries of the throat so that great blood flowed out, until the woman died between her own hands.
And I saw another doctor who forced the removal of a stone from a man whom he had operated on in his state, and the stone was large, and it came out to him and pulled that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died three days later.
And I had already warned him to remove it, and I saw that because of the largeness of the stone and the disposition of the patient he would surely die.
And I saw another doctor who took stipend from a duke in our land for surgery, and endeavored to set a broken leg of a black man on his own; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pulleys and stays with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then he loosened it according to his own desires, and then he relaxed it, and then he allowed it to become loose for some days and commanded that we loosen the bandage; and thus it happened that the leg and foot became abscessed, and ultimately led to perdition.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and subsequently achieved his tranquility and alleviation from his pains.
But meanwhile corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and let it ulcerate just a few days later, so that the great evil spread its malevolence to the lord of the house.
Which is because the cancerous humors are pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not need to be driven out with iron throughout, but rather remains in the member which suffers and is entirely hostile.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my own hands be divided into two parts: one being an operation associated with health, and another being an art in which there is peril in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard this and keep that, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and to despise you.
And therefore take up your own arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your own sick people with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to obtain salvation and glorious success, and keep the terrible diseases at bay from difficult healing, and remain steadfast with your arms from now on that make you afraid, so that your expectation in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for it is remaining to your glory, and even more in this world and in the next to your sanctity.
Galen has already said in certain of his writings: "Touch not the fallen, lest you fall yourself".
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part. The first chapter, ordered by the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and ironmongery of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on wounds, and on the extraction of splinters and similar things, all categorized and ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and by the forms of instruments.
You should know the quality of the joints of that cautery and the imperfections of it, and in what condition it is prohibited to use a cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of the cautery and its imperfections is a long and prolix sermon, subtle by science, and secret veiled; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and I will not exceed a little from their sermons, fearing prolivity.
And therefore I say that cautery is contrary to the entire universal complexion, which is in matter or its material, except for two complexions which are caudal with respect to their material.
In the caudal and dry complexion with material it will desiccate; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the opposite of it, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a caudal and dry disease with water that is caustic and dry should be healed.
And I say that the one who says the opposite of this, that through cautery is made a joint in all caudal and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already shown me on several occasions to uncover.
But I do not think it necessary to go further on this subject, for it has already been explained and exercised in the chapter on cautery by last exercise, and for understanding the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of diseases in their respective bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
But in other complexions, there is no fear for you, and most of all in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant on the joint with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that from the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its goodness, so much is overdone in combining it with medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and does not harm another member adjacent to it except for a small disturbance.
But the action of medicine combined with it reaches that member in which it is distant from, and very easily brings a disease of difficult healing to the sick member and very easily increases.
But the fire, due to its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this except that it is superfluous. And it has already been known to us through experience and the long service of studying art over the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not for the fact that it is read in a more subtle book in this pause to you, a secret veiled in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be useful in your souls.
And know, sons, that some disagree on the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the inconvenience caused by time accidents is submerged in the joint of that which is attracted to the cautery, and most of all if the cautery is for necessary pains or fistulous pains, strong and painful, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared of those who bring evil, which is greater than a small inconvenience entering through time.
And thus it is not known in your souls, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by anyone except the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is cured by cautery, there is no reduction at all times, and pause that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think by this, for cautery is nothing but a place in medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of why pains come.
But meanwhile, cautery is superfluous over medicine by the will of its virtue and value of its operation and greatness of its Lord.
And it is possible that its disease may return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluous humors, and that which has been acquired by him through food and similar causes; except that the disease for which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluous humors and moistures, such as cauterization of the tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that it will not return there, but rather this will happen in small degrees.
And it is also the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a speech deceiver, not according to what I understand in this, for I believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine or by another nearby cause.
And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and nearby at the end of the cause one administers cauterization, and it profits by that. And from here on, I say that cauterery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand as common and foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a difference, as it is not absolutely true, for I have already proved and demonstrated that it does not do so except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, just as they say; but meanwhile when you perform cauterization with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, because it is according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and since it prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust above it ignition, so that the gold melts in the fire, and case some thin sheets are formed, so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
And therefore it is necessary to perform cauterization with iron more gently and more precisely, in order to achieve the rightness of operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those from head to feet, in order that the demanding one may be alleviated of what he wishes for.
The First Chapter.
This cautery confers upon the humidity and coldness over the servile accident of which two causes are, that is, cause of soda and multitude of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the partitions of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleepiness, and toothaches and throataches, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, such as paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar cases in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, I command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine, clarifying the head, for three or four nights, according to what is required by the virtue of the patient and his age and habit.
And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that place steady between his two eyebrows on a carved bench, and let his hands rest on his knees.
And then pause the razor's stroke at the tip of your thumb on the nose between your eyebrows. But meanwhile, as you said about the middle place has arrived, mark that place with a tent, and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then pause that on the marked place with a tent, in a manner that it descends, by which my thumb is gradually constricted and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see that already some amount of bone is uncovered from the head, like the quantity of an egg yolk, then lift your hand, and if your hand does not return to the iron, but instead becomes cold, until it is seen by the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place, and let it remain for three days.
And then pause over the wound, covered with a bandage and cloth, and let it remain until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with four-leafed gentian medicine until it is healed.
And they said that when the wound remains open, so much the better for getting rid of it, because it is more good and more helpful.
And they said that some of them should be cauterized with the cord into the bone, and the cautery should be kept until some part of the specificity of the bone is revealed.
And then it will be scraped away what is adjusted to the bone, and then it will be cured.
And others said that with the cautery it will reach the last stage, until it presses strongly into the bone, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alpha-cattery: And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head will evaporate.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But I do not see these two species of cautery in all men, except in some individuals according to the way of fear; and leave it alone, as I say, better is with salt when it is so, because the head has been revealed through the solution of continuity there, just as we have testified in other members, and most especially when the patient's head is of a cold nature.
And the first species of cautery is more saved and better, as I say; and from that hole and with that work, there is salvation.
Second Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Head.
When in all the head a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient, and they use various remedies such as garters, cochias, capipures, emplausters, guats, cadels, and gualinas, and most especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which relapses and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and if it is not cold and finds little warmth, then that cauterizes another cautery, leaving a little interval. And then cauterize it over the horn of one's head with a cautery until the cord is parted. Cut the cord and let the bone be revealed with the quantity we have recounted, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head, at the location called the "vas", which is where the windpipe is situated. And lift your hand away from there, and do not reveal the bone, because the patient by this will experience a great and diverse pain unlike all other head cauterizations.
And I say that this cautery should be done in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than the one used for the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Fourth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Nocturnal Migraine.
When the pain is soft in the part of the head, or spreads to the eye, let the head be purged with medicines and let another cure be administered, which I have said in the sections on diseases; and if it does not profit, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either with acute medicine combined, or with iron.
But cautery with combined medicine is when you take a handful of alum, and dissolve it, and cut off the extremities from both ends. And then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a well-sharpened lancet until it is made a small opening leaving the cord, so that it is hidden.
And then stretch over it with a stopper to prevent descent constriction, and leave that for the space of three hours; and then remove the plug and apply the alum, and let the wound be left for two or three days, and then pause over it submerged in cloth until the location makes an opening.
And then cure that with gentian medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines which I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
But the cautery with iron, according to this manner: ignite the fire of which this is the form:
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small prominence.
And then pause over the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the arc may not be revealed which is left behind - and rotate the small iron piece by piece with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is revealed by the specificity of the cord is like the majority of it, and elevate your hand for this reason, that the artery may not be revealed which is left behind, lest a flow of blood should come.
And then soak the cloth in saltwater and pause that over the location, and leave it for three days; and then pause the cloth with a bandage, and then cure with gentian medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the scalp according to the cautery, and take care not to cut into the artery in this nocturnal migraine properly non-antique.
Fourth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Nocturnal Migraine (Antique).
When you cure a nocturnal migraine with the method we have described for previous cures, and what we have said in the sections on diseases, and if the cure does not profit, and at times the disease is so great that it does not reach to the point of what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary to ignite the scalp cauterizer until it is well-alighted, since you signify on the location of the pain with a line of length equal to the majority of the digit, or whatever that may be; and pause your hand for a moment and stretch it out, so that the artery may not be cut into and reach to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is marred by the act of mastication, and that the ligament is not torn and the nerves which are affected by it, and that there is no spasmodic seizure.
And if it is over the custodianship and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is fear, and most especially to him who ignores what he does and is not studious or expert; and leave the operation at the beginning.
And you will find a reminder of the regulation of the accidental bleeding from the artery according to my own method, in this very place of this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of the artery with two handles, and it is better and more suitable.
Fifth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Earaches.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have said in the section, and if the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
And then make the puncture carefully and ignite it, and bring it around the entire ear like a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in any one. Stretch out your hand with the cautery along the ridge of the ear little by little, so that you can mark the location with intent.
And if the cautery is applied to all these points on the entire ear, and where it is needed, then carefully cure the locations until they are healed.
Sixth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Turtura (Turbidur).
Turtura which is cured and with cautery is not but the species that comes through phlegm, according to what we have said in the sections on diseases.
Avoid cautery of the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of turtura with jerras and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and your cure does not bring relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first on the ridge of the ear, the second a little behind the temple, and the third at the conjunction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery on the opposite side of the ailing part, because only softening occurs in the part that appears to be healing.
And the form of cautery is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the toe, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the cord's specificity is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of scalp, the form of which is before the table. But however subtle it may be, there is a little bit that you see; and it is necessary to cut away the excessive redundancy by just a little.
And then cure the location with this water, as it is before the process, until it is healed.
Seventh Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water we have said and your medicine does not bring relief and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of one's head; and with the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and in the forehead. And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above.
And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more posterior; and then be cured with water that proceeds.
Eighth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Oblivion caused by Phlegm.
And it is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large doses and pills that serve as purgatives.
And then remove the head covering from the patient and pause on the forehead of it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
And pause that for a few days, because that is the manner of cautery. And do it according to the order we have said, as has been described.
And therefore if it is healed by those means; and if not, then do the three cauteries in the back part of one's head, which are descending from the uppermost part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery the length of the finger, and then cure the cautery with water that has proceeded.
But if you add more and the patient is already tolerant, then do the cautery in the middle location; and if you wish even greater addition, then cauterize that over both horns.
And carefully cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped, according to the form previously given.
Ninth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
And carefully process in the softening of the head with jerras and water as we have said; and then remove the head covering from the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery on all the horns of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body's flesh and the patient is very tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards with one cautery until the cord is consumed from the top to the bottom, and lift your hand. And carefully cure that until it is healed, and this is olive-shaped cautery.
Tenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No, it is not cauterized with epilepsy, but that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
And therefore it is necessary to soften the brain of the patient at the beginning with jerras and with the other cure which we have said in the section, when the disease is great and the patient is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarismes and mastiguation pills that serve as softeners, before this for several days, with the blessing of good foods.
And then remove the head covering from the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each horn of the head, may it be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be olive-shaped according to what has been previously said.
But if the patient is an infant, then pause on a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Eleventh Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thickened phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink water that softens the brain of it according to what has preceded in the section.
And then remove the head covering from the patient, and then make a tortoise shell of decent size made of lead, and place it in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should be seated comfortably and held from all sides.
And then apply a poultice, and it is more worthy of being wrapped in an old sheep's skin. And warm that over the fire with tempered heat by measure, which is what it suffered when it was most in need. And then place that in the middle part of the head on the circle, and let it stay there until it is cooled.
And do this with the patient for a whole week, with another regimen of good treatment until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to its nature, but in such a way that you hold your hand with a cautery thus arranged: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then place that covered in cloth or gray linen.
Twelfth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Water Descending into the Wound.
When it is declared to you at the beginning of water in the wound through the signs which I have said in the section, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head of him, and guard against all humidity.
And make that soak in bath water for several days.
And then command him to let his head grow, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing from two wounds, or from one side if it is the beginning of water flowing from one wound.
Open up with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of bleeding when it is being cauteryzed; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop the flow with some medicine that is at your disposal.
And you will come to know the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those things and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauteryzed in the skull between two bones with two cauteries produced at the end.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When tears from the eyes are ancient and accumulated through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is excessive moist phlegmatic humor, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into wounds, and with a cautery in the middle part of the head and with two cauteries in the skull between two temples, and with two cauteries in the skull between two bones. And if you need an addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the wound's back over the outer rim with a small cautery.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Bad Breath.
When you treat that with water as we have said in the section and your treatment does not bring relief, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient three cups of chicory for three nights; and then remove the head covering from him, and cauterize it with a middle-sized olive-shaped cautery. And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cautery and two cauteries on both outer rims of the head, just above the hair.
And beware of the artery so that you do not cut into it.
And with the clove-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Softening of Eyelids from Wounds.
When the eyelid of a wound is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery having this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if you wish, cauterize that on both outer rims a little with two cauteries all around, and let them be stretched from the temporal regions. And let the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the outer rim.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is habituated.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of a Wound when the Skin is Converted to the Inside and Punches the Wound.
When the skin of the wound is converted to the inside just like it punches the wound, cauterize those in two ways: either by fire or by medicine which combines.
If by a cauterization of fire, command the patient to keep his skin thus as those which are cleansed by water, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you punch that wound, then make him hold his breath, and then strengthen the wounds with a bandage so that it is not disfigured until the skin is born.
Then when the skin is born and equalized, then pause the patient's head in your seat, and then sign above the eyelid of the wounds with a tent sign, with a signal that is according to the figure of a mirth leaf, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the skin.
And then place a poultice wrapped in linen or mucus of papyrus on the wound.
And then ignite the cautery which has this form:
And then cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, in several times, until the surface of the cord is burned like a leaf of myrtle, entirely appearing properly.
And the signal of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the skin of it raised above the point of the wound.
And therefore lift your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause on it with cloth until the scar is elevated. And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns to the skin and makes it swell again, then make another time the cautery on that just as you did initially.
But if the skin is on the eyelid remaining, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized so that the skin does not hurt the wound.
But the cautery with medicine that combines is this: you command the patient to keep his skin thus until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a bandage of cloth in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take one ounce of known soap and one ounce of fresh vinegar. The end! And if there is anything else, then mix those causes well, and make it with a feast so that it is not cooled; and then spread the water over the cloth which is made in this shape like a leaf of myrtle, and pause that on one wound or both; and pause the wound wrapped in linen, and the patient's head be in your seat.
And pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little and not disfigure until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it just like fire.
And therefore, when it becomes apparent that the patient is feeling the biting of the medicine, then take away the medicine and wash that with your said water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted thus as it was washed with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, then return to that medicine on the location where the medicine had not taken effect and do not disfigure until your operation is equalized and the wound is contracted.
And then pause on it with cloth until the scar of adaptation is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to be vigilant and diligent in your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls on the wound, and if the eyelid becomes swollen again after some days and some skin cause punctures on the wound, then repeat your medicine on that location where the eyelid has become swollen, and do exactly as you did at the beginning, and then apply it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And know that the wounds of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
And may not be hidden the way of righteousness from him who studies in this art.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Wound.
When you cure fistula with water as we have said in the sections of diseases and your treatment does not correspond, then take care that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to pause his head on his seat, and hold his head with some minister between the two seats in such a way that he is neither troubled nor agitated by his own head.
And then place a poultice wrapped in linen or mucus of papyrus on the wound of it.
And then ignite the cautery which has this form:
which is curved, just like the shape of a cane or a whip of a tortoise, from one end to the other where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, it should come out like a tent.
But however, the one that is curved is better for your work.
And then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry up that place. And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the discharge from there.
And then place the cautery on it which is well ignited, and take with you the bandage to wrap around that part of the wound near the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient may be troubled, and then pause the cautery in the gray matter of the wound and corrupt that.
And then if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery one or two times, as necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then pause on that spot with cloth wrapped around and surrounded by a drying ointment until it is healed.
But if it has passed 11 days and is not healed, then pause on that spot with a sharp cutting medicine until the bone is exposed and roughened according to what is suitable in your chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier doctors also described: take the location of the fistula and fill it with that and then pause in that small fissure whose shape is like this: Pour into that the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and take your hand with a gentle grip, and do not let the patient be troubled because the molten lead may penetrate to the wound of that spot; and take care to pause on the wound of the patient wrapped in cloth or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and cure, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a cut of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will come in its proper place.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Wound of the Pots.
Many times cracks occur on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those cracks with water as we have said in the sections and your treatment does not take effect, then ignite the small cauterizing knife according to this shape that is seen:
And let the curvature of it be according to the subtlety of a scimitar.
And then pause that cautery gently in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Nineteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
When in the root of uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and becomes inflamed, and then breaks out, and is antiquated, and a fistula is formed, and you cure it but your treatment does not take effect, then take care that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place that ignited thing into the hole of the fistula, and with your hand guide the hot iron until it reaches the bottom of the wound, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then cure it with water as we have said for curing until it is healed.
And therefore, if the pus is abscessed and is healed, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the rotten bone according to what will be found in its chapter.
Twentieth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure them with medicines but they do not correspond, then pause the patient's head on your seat, and ignite the cautery in the shape of which will come accordingly, namely that you pause the quill over the tooth and insert into it the hot iron quickly, and take care to guide your hand so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then have the patient drink a mouthful of salt water and hold it for an hour, and then stop, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Twenty-First Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or in it is cold or warm, and the cure with medicine does not correspond, then make a cautery there in two ways: either with a cow's border, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder is when you take the border of cows and boil it in a cauldron with iron, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the tent, and then immerse that boiled border in hot water, and pause that on the painful tooth quickly until it is cooled.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse a piece of cloth or cloth in the boiling water above said, and pause that on the painful tooth, and then pause on that hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
But however, the cautery with fire is that you wait for the glowing tip of iron or steel, and it should be in the heart of it some roughness, and the intensity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the shape that will come, and pause it on the tooth, and guide your hand so that the cautery is cooled; and do this several times until the pain is relieved either on that day or the next day.
And take care that by the impression of that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good border and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as you wish, extreme or not, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the quill:
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Extrophulas.
When extrophulas are full of flesh and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to lighten the digestion of those, then ignite the cautery curved in this shape having two broad ends so that the smoke of the cautery escapes through the other end, and pause it ignited on that apostema once, and again if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and take care to leave it for three days and then pause on that spot wrapped in cloth until what the fire has burned away is removed.
And then cure it with an ointment, tents, and cloths until it is healed.
Twenty-Third Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Sore Throats and Strangulation of Ale.
When the humors come up to the trachea of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness of congestion, then take care that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize it by reaching the root of the cough in the affected location.
And take care not to let the cautery reach the throat nor burn away the membrane of it, but only a little.
And then cauterize that with another cautery reaching the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And the cautery should be shaped like a claw, as before described.
And then cure it with water as was previously described until it is healed.
Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors and the patient has no fever or tissuage, but is an old illness, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected locations, one above and one below; and with another cautery in the middle location of the back between two nipples; and let the cautery be shaped like a claw according to the previous description.
And if you wish, make the cautery piercing with the point of the cautery that is called puncta, in the shape which precedes in the piercing of earache.
And let the points go into those; and then cure it with water as was previously described until it is healed.
And now the cauteries have three rumps where cauterization is done with those: in one go, you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Titilliation, which is the Head of the Auxiliary.
When the head of the auxiliary is displaced due to lubricous humors and does not settle in its original place upon returning, but rather moves away from it as we have testified, then take care to reduce the displacement first, and then have the patient be reversed onto his back or side; and elevate the membrane which is at the posterior part of the citilliation up to the upper parts with your left hand, if the juncture is displaced backwards.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the membrane until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will be that of four heads.
And several times it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason there are eight cauteries.
And then pause on the cautery with pure salt, and take care to make the patient adhere to tranquility, and not be harmed by anything for some time until it is comforted.
And if the displacement is above and there is made so, then take care to cauterize on the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with pointed puncture-cauteries, because the juncture is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and many humors come into the stomach, exceeding its capacity and multiplying rumblings within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment but they do not correspond, then take care that the patient be reversed onto his back, and extend his arms and legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one leaving the ribs for the quantity of a finger's width with a claw-shaped cautery, and two leaving the sides of the chest with two pointed cauteries, until the figure of a triangular cautery is obtained; and prolonging them so that they do not become adjusted to make a pressure.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the membrane.
And the figure of the cautery is according to this shape without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this shape; and that will be one cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this shape:
And then the stomach is pierced punctually at that point which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with tenderness, and then cauterize it with a cautery in those points; and then cure it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Fretful Feet.
When the pain arises in the feet due to coldness or humidity or excessive ventilation, exceeding its normal capacity and causing excessive effusion through egressio superflua, and the patient is not cured with water as we have described, then take care that the patient be reversed onto his neck, and sense three cauteries according to this shape and quantity applied to the feet left of the hipbones, where it will reach the decubitus of a man.
And the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries are in the shape of the length of a straight arm.
And do not compress your own motion with the cautery.
And if the quantity of water used is equal to the quantity of the membrane's thickness, and not more adjusted; and if the patient stays on his feet; and if he is not standing, then lie down, which has stretched out its arms and raised its shoulders.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cutlery-shaped cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the membrane be taken into account so that it may be taken into all the vessels, for the membrane here is subtle; and know this.
Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Perforation of Apostemas of the Feet with a Cautery.
When an ulcer or apostema arises in the foot and you wish to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will be troubled by gravity and pain will not be alleviated.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then with great pain it will be alleviated and many times you will fatigue doctors in its cure.
Then take care that the patient be reversed onto his neck; and sense the location of the apostema with tenderness; and then ignite the cautery which is similar to a rag, its shape having been described on the previous page. And then cauterize with that cautery until all the membrane is burned away, until it reaches the bone, until in it you will find health.
And then cure that patient through treatment of other apostemas until he is healed.
And do not use this form of cauterization unless you have studied it in the art of medicine and have experienced many illnesses; but this one has been tested some times and has been bold on this operation, but yet leave that to us, and is more sweet.
Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Pleurisy.
They said that the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology are to be applied to pleurisy with coldness according to this manner, and it is what you take from the roots of aristology, a long dry root that is found, and it is as thick as a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one slightly declining to the side below the beard, and with two more in that location which declines between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly towards the back; and another in the middle location of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three more behind; and one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and two more on the two sides of the foot, leaving out the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not compress your own hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the membrane at work.
And it is said by some ancient ones that they have seen some men who used a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignited it, and then placed it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that apostema and health is restored, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for if you act quickly, the wound will soon be healed and the fistula will close without being cured.
Thirty-First Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Melancholy.
When you treat the disease of melancholy with water as we have described in the division and your treatment does not correspond, then take care to use a cautery there in three ways, all of which are drawing ones, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melancholy, just like the figure of the cauteries of the foot, whose shape has been described before.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have described in the cauteries of the foot similarly.
And do not compress your own hand with the cautery; and the patient should lie on his back.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two handles, the kind we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the membrane which is at the end of the melancholy where the patient's left side is located.
And be your elevation that which lifts up the membrane according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries may be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then enter between the two handles, ignite one, and make it penetrate into the membrane of the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries will be made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
And then care for the cautery more than usual for several days, because it is more certain that other previous causes in treatment.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Hydrocephalus.
Cauteries do not cure hydrocephalus, but rather only properly situated ones.
When you treat the hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment which we have described in the division and your treatment does not correspond, then take care to use four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, one over the foot, one over the melancholy, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportioned to the subtlety of the membrane.
And then leave the cautery untouched for a long time, so that it may heal slowly.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with water as is necessary, and thus two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claw-shaped according to the shape that precedes it, and that one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Feet and Limbs.
When the feet are apostematized in hydrophobic patients and filled with stagnant water, take care to cauterize the feet on the back of the knee without applying any water that is between the auricular and anular bones, and lift up your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then lift up your hand and do not return it entirely, for the stagnant water resists.
And then make two cauteries on each limb, and on each limb, make a cautery at the extremity of the cutlery-shaped cautery. And then make the cauteries according to the length of the limb: one at the top and another at the middle location of the limb; and on each limb, two cauteries.
And then leave the wound open without treatment for a long time, so that some water may drain from it.
And then cure with those causes which we have described.
Thirty-Third Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Abdominal Organs.
When the abdominal organs are weakened by cold and humidity to such a degree that they are unable to perform their natural functions, namely the digestive and retentive virtues, which reside in the stomach and intestines, and if treatment with water does not correspond and the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue exhibited, then take care to cauterize it with a large cautery on the stomach as described previously in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, with a ring-shaped cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a claw-shaped subtle cautery; or two cauteries.
And if at times excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then take care to cauterize on the small intestine and on the intestines, and firmly place two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure of which you will not err.
Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors, frozen or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with water as we have described in the division and your treatment does not correspond, then take care to cauterize with three cauteries on the remaining spondilh of the little back and small triangular ones, and with a cautery above the navel that falls between two digits.
And if you observe that the stomach of the patient is frozen and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is repeatedly apostematized, then take care to cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and one cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the melancholy of the patient with a claw-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for some time, and then cure the patient until he is healed.
Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Athletes near their Abdomen.
When you excise athletes, then take care to ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray. And then insert that ignited cautery into the excised athlete, and lastly apply your hand to guide it until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows.
And make it once or twice, for if athletes are many, then take care to cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then cure them with water that corresponds to their wounds until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more difficult in judgment.
Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Fistulas that are formed in Nature at the End of Parts of the Body.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified by this, then heal with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the end of nature, and it is old, filled with pus and corrupted moisture, then what is more worthy than to try that with subtle intent, and take care to know the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned tent.
And then ignite the cautery which is similar to a ray. And then place that ignited cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity which the tent reaches.
And then iterate on that cautery until those corrupted bodies are consumed at once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And take care not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the fistula goes into the bladder or intestines, then take care of all those places; and do not make it so until the fistula is in a fleshy location and you are certain that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and all the matter has been excised from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter is not removed from there, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting or falling into those causes of which a memory will be recalled in its place.
Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Bronchi.
When in the bronchi there is pain due to cold or great ventosity, and by this the patient's cough is alleviated, then take care that you cauterize on those bronchi with a cautery over each bronchus with a claw-shaped cautery of which the remembrance precedes.
And firmly place two cauteries on the second one, a little way apart, so that there will be three linear cauteries, and therefore they will be more difficult in judgment.
Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
When debilitation and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient does not retain urine, then take care to cauterize on the most posterior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the small intestine begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the nodes of the foot; and cauterize with one cautery on the most inferior part of the back, or with two if necessary.
And be a claw-shaped cautery according to the process described.
Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Marrow.
When cold and moisture come into the marrow, and therefore conception is prohibited, and the menstrual courses of her are corrupted, and the prompting of them is delayed, and there occurs pain in the bearing down of them, then take care that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have described for the bladder; and one cautery on the most posterior part of the back, or two, and be the claw-shaped cautery.
Fortieth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Ankle.
When moist dislocations are poured out on the part of the ankle, and caused by swelling of the same location, and the sign is that the limb is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is found in the part where the bone is broken.
Then take care to cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a ring-shaped cautery similar to a circle, as you have noted in the tent of the circuit of the same part, and thereby the part falls into the middle location of the circle.
And be the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not before you, then take care to cauterize with three cauteries and one large olive-shaped cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the membrane; and then cure that place until it is healed.
Fortieth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain comes to the part of the ankle, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured with water as we have described and does not correspond, and this is old, then take care that you release the patient from gross humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that place.
And the method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: or a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
And thus according to two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that place on the part of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and make good depth in them. And be the space between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
But sometimes be the cautery on the middle location above the head of the ankle, so that there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, then cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and it shall be a containing circle that burns out the subtlety of all the membrane.
And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain clings to the ankle and does not spread into the joint.
But if it spreads into the joint, then take care to cauterize with two cauteries on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain; and one cautery on the hollow for four fingers a little above the hairy part.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the subtlety of the membrane.
And if the patient complains that the pain is spread into the location near the three or four fingers, then take care to cauterize there with a cautery for three or four points or more if needed.
And if the patient complains of pain behind the kneecap when looking at the joint, then take care to cauterize there with a cutaneous cautery.
And take care in all cauterization that you do not finish the cautery until you have burned out nerves or large arteries, and thereby it is against the patient's interest or causes harm.
And you have already and seen one and another of those who were cauterized on the hollow and finally in the cauterization, and their leg was filled with inflamed fire until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then suddenly a severe solution of the belly occurred, and thereby death approached.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise men say that in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, with the circuit being half the size of a palm; and be the orifice as large as an almond shell or a little less.
And within that circle be another tierce; and be the space between them the quantity of the nodes of the foot; and let those circles be above two parts; and be the length of them one node or two nodes, and make in those margins an iron decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form of it:
And then be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and throws sparks, and then be placed upon the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side. And thus cauterize that place with three circular cauteries in one go.
And then leave that place for three days, apply a poultice to it with a border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have used little because of the terror of looking at it, and therefore few have been found who look upon it.
But from good cauteries on him who suffered them, and finds with that the place of his.
But cauteries with medicinal adhesions are those which you make two circles having a perforated armula in which the guaffle of the iron door is placed; be the length of the walls in the nave, namely two nodes or as many as there are.
And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves within each other according to this form:
And then place it on the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side, and compress your hand over the part of the ankle; and then take cold water and pour it between the two circles, and let the quality of that be with a small fire gradually, and keep it for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and sticking of it - for that biting is like that of fire - until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the ankle with lukewarm water.
And then leave that place for three days and apply a border to it until the blackness of the sticking is reduced, and leave it so for some days, and then run with it a purging; this is the last in judgment.
And then cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
And if the pain is spread into the joint or knee, make a statue of it in water according to how it is made in the ankle equally.
And this is the method of cold water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of causes not extinguished from both ankles, one part of each; mix them and place them in a new wave of which the left part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And then place the bottom of one wave into another wave inverted, and pour over that alkali and living causes with lukewarm water which absorbs those for one finger's length; and thus you compress them with my own hand for good compression, and leave the hole which will descend from the lukewarm water into the left part of the wave inverted.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkali renewed, for that which is done by me is of great force, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation is like fire.
And some of the medicines are mixed with those which are cauterized on the ankle, such as mezereum and myrrh, and causes with salt aniseed, so that they may be mixed together.
And Galen recounted the story of an ancient man who was operated on and cured by the procedure which cured ankle pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnified its greatness, saying that it did not require any other cure, and thus he was healed in one go just as recommended, for truly that man quickly recovered from his illness.
And it is that which is pressed with certain ragweed, and if not found, a fresh fig; and some is mixed with a little gray powder and applied to the ankle where the pain is, or in the joint, or in the knee, and tied.
And it is left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient perceives a relaxation of the sticking.
And then take it out and thus when the body of him is flushed, put it in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that no one should use these medicines with cautery unless there is a proper evacuation of the body.
But already Asclepiades says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a wound of a goat, it will approach the patient's bed; and let the cautery be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.
And then take dried goat skin and inflate it with fire until it is made into carbon; and then place it on the wool and leave it in until it is stretched. And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle and brings rest to the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the "cauteri of vaquas".
The end of the 42nd chapter.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
At times pain is in both places due to multiple causes, such as by crushing or piercing or excessive evacuation, and similar causes, namely the infusion of moist and humid matter.
And cautery is not used except in this single species which is made by the effusion of moist matter.
Then it is necessary to evacuate the patient with bitter pills and similar ones that are made on both places where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of the place, plus signs with ten in each line or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the medicine.
And let it be done by a point cautery.
And if you wish, then cauterize with three or four cauteries or with a middle clavial cautery according to this form:
The 43rd chapter.
On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Goutiness.
Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their tenderness in the elbow, accompanied by elevation and movement.
And you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the nodes of it that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And then when you find this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize that place with a circle cautery according to this form: which takes the cautery on all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a point cautery two lines or three. And let the points be properly spaced between them.
And then cure the place until it is healed with what we have said.
But beware that cautery should not be administered in gout caused by spasms of nerves.
The 44th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by moist humors which are absorbed into each member of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this "podagra" properly.
And therefore since gout caused by moist humors is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not relapsed, then relapsing cautery.
And you cauterize that place with proper evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
And it is an olive-shaped cautery whose form is this:
And if it is necessary that points be made on the fascia of the foot, then make them with a point cautery. And if the pains rise to the knuckles or to other joints, and many times it develops, then cauterize that place on each knuckle with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are necessary for these cauteries to be at your disposal, then cauterize that place and do not press too hard with the cautery before, so that it is only slightly applied around the subtlety of the membrane.
And if the pains rise to the knuckle and the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the most part and is called "suagra", then puncture in the circle of the joints as it revolves, puncturing on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the said places, then puncture in the circle of the joints on each node and on the tip of the finger.
And if the pains rise near the joints or muscles after some days, then cauterize all of them on both sides of the assistants.
And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is made with this cautery, then the patient will be healed, God help.
The 45th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Ruptures.
When rupture occurs in the groin and says that the bulge is before the navel at the genital region, and it begins to approach, then it is necessary for you to tell the patient to stop eating on the same day and to use gentle causes so that the wound may descend from the belly.
And then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his arm up until the hole is made or the navel or bulge appears.
And then return to that place with your fingers, and signal to the patient to make an attempt at rupture on the bone of the pelvis, signaling the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the separated parts of the breast.
And then ignite the cautery whose form is this:
until it is a good red and gives sparks. And then reduce the bulge or navel to its natural shape, and place your hand on the location so that the bulge does not swell.
And you have already passed between the patient's joints and left one joint, another serving on his knees, and another on his feet, which has its own hands.
And then place the cautery on that spot, signaled by your hand with the cautery standing straight, and continue to apply it until you reach the bone of the pelvis into the midst of the duodenum; and repeat that procedure again if you have not achieved success in the first attempt into the bone.
And observe wisely the appearance of the bulge at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that bulge, lest it cause harm to the patient or bring about great evil.
And know that when you apply the cautery do not touch the bone, nor do you confer your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their great and measure.
And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with a border, until the scar of the fire is renewed.
And then cure that place with other remedies until it is healed.
And the patient lies on his back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the pain is gone.
And it is necessary that you moderate the patient's nutrition according to the length of time of their healing, and that the bulge does not swell outside due to the effort of recovering.
And then, after 40 days, gradually reduce his diet and keep him on it for another 40 days.
And he is reduced to light labor and moderate nourishment and drink, and violent speech, for when he uses this regimen of entire healing, then he will be healed.
And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and wish that they do not fail, then cauterize the rupture with a redon cautery according to the quantity of it, and this is what is exhausted from the navel as the third part of it; and then cure that place with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And some of the first ones have already said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signaled by intent:
and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the left side more above the rupture, and another line above; and then place your hand with a clavial cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
The 46th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Twist.
When it occurs in some members by crushing or piercing pain and persists that pain for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a point cautery.
And it is the cautery of the entire member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and debilitation, location of twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well and good; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery on him; for it is customary with those pains that they are punctured into the member which approaches the one being treated, in order to achieve this with a cautery until the patient is healed.
The 47th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some lepers have been cured with a cautery by great divine aid, and more so if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and does not spread, nor is it static, and fear for the patient that corruption comprehends all of their body and all their composition; then cauterize that place on the head with 9 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and a second just below it, up to the forehead; and two on each ear, and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, your hand with the cautery will make a slight impression on the bone, and from there, the scabs will be dislocated, so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the nose according to what was prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already expanded on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary for you to cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on both cheekbones, and two on both vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one on each vertebra close to the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each hip, and one on each hipbone, and two on each knee, and one on each kneecap, and two on both shoulders, and two on both muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize that place on all the joints of the said arms and legs, and on each heel of the patient's feet.
And beware of the nerves which are on top of the calf, lest you burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they are beneficial and conferent; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they do with their own, because the body of the patient is already stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as predetermined by the species of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with flour of ears cooked in honey and other remedy until it is healed.
The 48th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When some member is stuporized or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stuporized member with cauteries according to the greatness of the member or its smallness.
And your cautery should go a little bit into the thickness of the cord. And then cure that place with remedies until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and on the vertebrae of the back, and then the sensation of the nerves which govern that member returns, and the stupor is renewed.
But do not venture further on this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
The 49th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Moles that are Morbid.
When a mole is ancient and does not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on that place with a preon cautery for a little bit according to the quantity of the specie of the cord until the whiteness and color of it are renewed, and the color of it is changed.
And then cure that place with flour of ears and lentils mixed with red oil and leaves of arnagrosa, and with the blood of dove or the blood of vulture, each one a part, and all are mixed together; and then apply a cloth to the location and place it there until it is healed.
The 50th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Cramp.
When cramp is beginning and you want to stop it, then cauterize that place with a circular cautery in the circle of it, just as it revolves.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, for I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circular cautery, just as we have said, or with many cauteries.
The 51st chapter.
On the Cauterization of Blistering.
When some blistering is delayed in maturation, and so it is because of superfluous fluids causing it, or due to the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of blistering; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctate cauteries; and then release that which is fasting for maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it; and place that in the middle location of blistering until it penetrates the cord.
And if the cautery in that location is more behind, because the arm's body is alleviated; and then cure that place until it is healed.
The 52nd chapter.
On the Cauterization of Corroding.
Corroding is a walking corruption in the member, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corroding is in a location which can suffer a cautery with fire, then you should ignite small to large cauteries, many and few, according to what is convenient in that location where it is corroding.
And then cauterize that place from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it.
And then release that place for three days, and pause on the locations cauterized with a thin layer of oil mixed with it until all the scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy and free from corruption in which there is no decay, well and good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that place that is rotting in the corrupted locations.
And corroding is medicated some times with acute medicine, because that is halfway to a cautery. But in any case, a cautery with fire is of greater and more prompt aid.
And I have already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have understanding of it.
The 53rd chapter.
On the Cauterization of Knots and other similar things.
Many times it happens that the parts left behind from a bad illness which is called a knot, and it is a great, inflamed cause that causes the foot to be lame; and cauterization in those places is done in two ways, namely with fire and with hot water.
But the cautery with fire is when you ignite the cautery with a concave shape similar to a pen nib, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the knot from all parts, and it has subtle edges.
And then pause that which is ignited on the knot, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in the circle of the knot until the cautery reaches the depth of the knot. And then release that place for three days until the flesh begins to grow back. And then apply that place with wild mallows beaten with salt, and leave the poultice on that place for one night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times it happens so in the surface of the body, mostly on the arms and legs, then you must administer a cautery with hot water; which is to take a quill made of iron or bone or pen nib, and place that on the knot; and then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and grasp your hand, and rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and apply pressure to the edge of the quill in the root of the knot, and allow the hot water to flow through the preon of the root of the cau; and wait for the patient a little while for the sting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, so that the knot with its roots is eradicated.
And thus do it for those and then apply the other remedy until you have arrived at all of them from their own in the body.
And then cure those places where the roots of the knots are eradicated with this remedy of the medicines which bring forth flesh.
The 54th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Trembling.
When it occurs to someone with some trembling due to irritation of the nerve or because of fever caused by irritation, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize that place with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and on the feet of him, and on the stomach of him, with an olive cautery.
And the trembling of him subsides and hastens the recovery of the illness caused by irritation.
The 55th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Blows to the Body.
When in the body there are accidental blows and pustules which burst open, causing wounds made of gross corrupted matters; then it is necessary at first appearance, that it should be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with the roots of long-leafed erestology; or with a lentecular cautery.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe it, and excess fluids are removed from those places, and they heal from those.
But in any case, it is necessary that this be done with proper evacuation by phlebotomy.
The 56th chapter.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding due to Incision of Arterial Wounds.
Many times there occurs bleeding of the arteries which is caused by the wound that precedes it, or from the incision of apostemes or cautery of a member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that.
Therefore, when it happens to you, then take your hand and place it on the orifice of the artery, and apply pressure on that with your said finger many times until the flow of blood is stopped by your said finger, and there is no more bleeding.
And then pause with the fire the olive cauteries, small and large, by name many, and blow on them until they are well ignited.
And then take one small or large olive cautery according to the location and wound where the artery is torn, on that vein, hastening more than you would have removed the said blood, and apply the cautery until the bleeding stops.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your said finger and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to apply it repeatedly until the bleeding stops.
And beware that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that you bring another evil upon the patient.
And know that when the artery flows blood, then it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or with a cautery such as we have said, or with extraction, for when it is extracted the ends of it are burned and the bleeding is stopped; or that it be tied with a ligature or a bandage by strong constriction, or that there be applied medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they are strengthened with poultices and binding in decent manner.
But he who administers restraint decently with ligature and bandage or by constriction with cloths or by position of burning causes and similar things does not come forth until later.
But if this should happen to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work with the pause of the said finger on the orifice of that vein just as we have said, and understand that the great constriction of it until the bleeding stops from the upper part of the wound, and on the artery the said finger is not removed; and above the artery be sprinkled with hot water of very great coldness so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and then consider what kind of cautery or medicine is needed.
On the Incision and Perforation, and Ventouses, and Phlebotomy, and Wounds, and their similar things.
We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses where cautery with fire is suitable and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from head to feet.
And I proceed in this chapter by this manner, so that the one seeking this may be illuminated on what has been asked.
And before you begin this, son, learn that in this chapter it is about the same things as are in the first chapter on cautery.
And therefore it is necessary that there be great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs which is with blood and in which life depends on the injection of the vein or incision over the apostema or awareness of exit or purging of the wound or extraction of sageta or incision of peyra and their similar things. And with all those, terror and trembling are accompanied, and in most of them, death.
And I warn you that may not fall upon you this which is the cause of death, for some times you will have to learn the ways of men with many diseases. And among those is some who will depart with their own disease and it is light for them to die, and thus by the vehemence of that which they find in their disease, and by the length of their disease, and because the disease itself is fear which means death.
And among those is one who gives you his own son and property, while you are expecting his recovery, and his own disease is deadly.
And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any cause over it unless aprop scientific certainty which verifies what you see, and through which the succession of praiseworthy things may come.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses prophetic and indicative signs which are converted to health, for in that is aid to you concerning the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God breathes His understanding into you and does not leave you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinct by chapters as it preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be illuminated for you what you seek and about which you have need.
The first chapter.
On the Cure of Water which is contained in the Head of Children.
Know that this illness often occurs in children during childbirth and when the midwife tightens the child's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have never seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, death has been near, and thus it is left undone in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water overflowed, and his head was always magnificently swollen to the point where it could not be contained within itself because of the grandeur of his head, and even more so, the moisture increased to the point of mortal fire.
And this moisture is added either between the bone and the skull or added behind the bone above the cranium.
Therefore, the operation in that case is to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be about two inches, so that the moisture flows through it, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore, if the moisture is more increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions according to this manner:
And if the moisture is behind the bone, then it is signified by you that you should widen the commissures of the head in all parts and the water is squeezed out when you compress that with your said hand on the parts inside and not be hidden from you. It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
And then apply the incision and extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the fissures with cloths and poultices; and then introduce this mixture of vinegar and oil on the fifth day, and then release the bandage and cure the wound with gentle remedies, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which takes into account the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for some times it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or in the right side, or in the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the filling of water, and make there what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid blood flowing from it, and the patient may die due to this flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Second Chapter.
When it happens to someone that has cataracts or wounds on the eyes or feet, and this is old and does not respond to the cure of medicines, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore it is necessary when you want to incise those which the patient's head is affected by, and then freshen the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider on pulsing the vein; and the locations of each on the locations which are near the ears are depressed, and so much so that they are only visible in certain men.
And then signal on the artery with a tentative touch, and then incise each one with a spatula of each part as acute as the incision penetrates into the bone, and this is in the latitude of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incisions in the parts above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, because when some vein is incised the blood flows out with pulsatile gushing, which springs forth frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers' breadth, and then signal with a tentative touch, and make an incision into the bone.
And as much blood as is necessary to be taken away is one ounce of wine. and not too much or too little blood is taken away, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears to be the virtue of the patient's disease and the filling of the artery in him.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the skull, then incise this so that no apostema may develop.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure that with gentle remedies until it is healed.
Third Chapter.
On the Extraction of Arteries which are in the temples.
When to someone there occurs an ancient or migrainous headache, caused by excessive humidity and quality in the lacertae of the temples, or an old and vehement one similar to those, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine, but this does not conform, then we have resorted to extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient scratches the skin which is on the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden from few men except by the intensity of heat.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then freshen the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with hot water until it appears to you manifestly. And then take the spatula of which this is the form: And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the onyx, and then incise one part from that according to the quantity by which the extremities of him are lengthened and contracted, and not allow blood flow, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
And then evacuate one ounce of blood. within three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate that in two places with double-folded cedema or cords at length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur before the consolidation of the wound and avoid blood flow.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two bandages, and do this at that hour or approximately another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone and a cutlary cautery until the extremities of him are incised, and remain in that location of the said work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a state of scalding complexity; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish off humidities, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And it is necessary that you extract the arteries which fill the location of an old wound, and let them be paused on decently made poultices, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some remedies until it is healed.
And if while you are working another time the blood flow from the artery occurs, then you should catch that blood and restrain it, either with a cauterization or by filling the location of the wound, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if any cause of those is not present to you, then pause your said hand over the location until the blood is congealed, and then fill the location with hot water of vehement warmth so that the acuteness repose, and be strengthened according as is necessary.
And this is the easier method in extracting an artery: that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with a tentative touch, and then place each one, moderately ignited, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of him may be elongated, for it is not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two handles shall be examples. But however if the sharpness is less than that of two handles, it is better, for if they are keen like two handles close to each part, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, as in those there is some thickness, it is held that the heat of the fire is in them and the flesh is absorbed somewhat.
And this work is better in all works and easier.
And the space which is between two handles is the quantity of the thickness of that.
Fourth Chapter.
On the Cure of Corrupt Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears.
When there are acid tears, and the body of those veins which are above the forehead on the top of the head is outside, and does not conform to any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient is already reddened and senses a wandering motion in his own forehead as if it were a march of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, moistened so that their eyelids are condensed, and the eyelids are scarred by the acuteness of the tears, the ancient physicians mixed in the cure of those with this operation, and named that cure with a spatula.
And this is that you command the patient to tear off the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers' breadth: one fissure be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers' breadth adjusted.
And if you have a sponge or cloth, moderately moistened with which you can absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, whose form is as follows: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Scrape with that all the codena which is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and then make this of the incision to migrate into the second incision. And then strengthen yourself with this spatula and enter into the first incision another time with a different instrument called cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the edge of that sharp instrument against the skin attached to the codena, and the edge of it will cut into the bone, and push that in until it reaches the fissure, and then incise with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
But that incision should be continued up to where it appears on the codena, and then make this in the middle fissure into another fissure.
And since a quantity of blood flows, express the places where the clots of blood are congealed.
And then pause in each fissure, and place on those powders well mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and make sure that there is no development of a cauterized apostema.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer great abundance of hot water or tepid water, and then cure with gentle remedies, such as basilicon oil, rosy oil, and others, until the wounds are healed.
Fifth Chapter.
On the Cure of Tears through Cautery and those which descend from the parties behind the head.
When someone has very hot and continuous cauterized tears, and the patient's eyes are exhausted and small, and the regard of theirs is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and their skin peeled, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know through these accidents that the matters and cauterization do not come from many veins of the parties behind proceeding.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and then incise a fissure at the middle of the forehead, a little bit for the latitude (and begin from the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incised into the bone; and extend your hand over the lacertae of the temples which are attached to the mastigacio), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or bandages. And then strengthen above with powders well mixed in wine and oil, so that there is no development of a cauterized apostema.
And when you have removed that and see that the apostema is already diminished, then it is necessary to freshen the bone until it begins to produce flesh, and then cure with a drying regimen which will cause the flesh to appear, just as if you take two parts of barley flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from this make an embalming paste and administer it to these wounds in the natural birthplace of the flesh.
Sixth Chapter.
On the Cure of That Which Catches in the Ears.
All causes that catch in the ears are one of four species, for either it is mineral pyre or a similar cause, such as iron and vermillion, or it is from a plant, such as cheese or fava, or it is a fluidic cause, such as hot water and vinegar and their likenesses, or some beast.
And therefore when pyre catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not agree with the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if sometimes the pyre appears, then you should distill into that some cause of violet oil or musk, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stornutation in suitable conditions, and apply the nose to the event of stornutation. And then pause in the cavity of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, for many times it is forgotten due to these causes.
And if not, then you should administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "gesti" epicicario, subtle of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten with "gesti", then it is so; and otherwise, you should administer the extraction of it with an onyx subtle of little duplication.
And therefore if it is not forgotten by this, then you should make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and soft oil so that only the tube may be opened. And then extract with the gentle touch and strong attraction, for many times as this which we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then you should take from the lighted candle or the prepared wax with which the birds are attracted to take a small quantity, and pause that in the extremity of ray, and then wrap around that spot decently paused. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then extract the ear from moisture.
And therefore if it is not forgotten by all the causes which we have recounted, then you should be cautious to cut that before it develops into cauterized apostema or spasm.
And the manner of cutting that is: first you should anoint the patient with the vein sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cease between your hands and convert the ear into the upper parts, and then make a small fissure in the root of the ear where the grey matter is located before you. And let the fissure be of lunar shape until it reaches the pyre, and when the pyre is blackened, stop that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the cause catches in the ear is one of the fats that agree and are inflamed, then you should administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your eye sight, then you should take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer to that the incision of that fat which is caught in the ear.
And do not make it when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many pieces, and then extract from those with onyx or subtle gesti, or by incision as we have said, because it facilitates the extraction of it.
But in the water which has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutation with suitable conditions at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a little old cloth, and then place that over the ear in which is the water, and if forgotten by this, well; otherwise, take many small pyre stones and lions according to the length of the finger, and calcine those in the fire for a short time, and then have the patient insert one of those into the hole of his own ear and let it settle on that side of that part and strike with another pyre stone over the pyre which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this process with pyre until all the water has been forgotten.
Therefore do not cease this process with pyre until all the water has been forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take from paper or from bone. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until the wax of it is burned.
And then place another bone and make this so many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract that with a tube as we have said above of the pyre extractor.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is small and similar to a pea, then extract it as we have said above; but if it is of great size which appears to the sense of feeling, then you should administer the extraction with gesti and onyx, and the cause of it becomes easier than all the other causes that catch in the ear.
But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said above and in the treatise on distillations, and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary to observe the ear at the sun.
And therefore if there appears any cause of worms, then you should extract that with gesti or subtle onyx; but if no cause appears, then you should take a tube made from a reed and above it is broadened in the shape of this: And then insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck it with strong suction, and make this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if it does not obey your eye sight, then you should apply and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And then your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make that of silver or of iron, made from a reed, with a small hole and above it.
And therefore as you are about to do that which is in the cavity of the tube of containment, here where it is necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it around the end of it decently and tightly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ascension, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the tube  and that is in the ear , and then insert the ray with a tight grip above and press gently with your hand on that with a temperate compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ascension and the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is inserted in the ear is already burned with fire a little. And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because the medicines of the ear cannot bear this.
Seventh Chapter.
On the Cure of Impediment of Ears.
Some times some children are born with the vents of their mothers unperforated, and this already happens to some men, impediment in the meat of the ear due to wound or flesh not being in that; and this impediment sometimes is made in the preone of the tract of the ear which does not follow the sense, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the preone of it, which does not comprehend the sense, is in the greater difficulties for difficult cure.
And in that which comprehends the sense, it is necessary to pause the ear of the patient at the sun and look into it. And therefore if you see apparent oppression, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
If the end of it in which there is a small latitude, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two lions wide so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
And therefore if the impediment is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should extract that with subtle onyx and incise it with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the impediment is in the preone of the ear, then take a subtle ray of lion and heat that with fire for a short time, and then place that in the meat of the ear.
And therefore if you have sensed oppression with that which the patient has discovered with facility, through gravity of air, force the oppression of it with facility; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then pause in the ear with cloth of linen according to the quantity of the breadth of the hole which you have wrapped around the Egyptian bandage; and make this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some oil and pour it into water and pulverize over it, and use it; and if the ear is already blackened, then it is necessary to extract the poultice and substitute it with another poultice which you will wrap in cloth soaked in rose oil, until the cauterized apostema yields; and then cure that until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then you should submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause over the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Eighth Chapter.
On the Cure of Athazil Which Afflicts the Eyelids.
Athazil which afflicts the eyelids of some people sometimes humid, and at other times dry.
Therefore it is necessary to take those with tenhallas or onyx, and incise them with the spatula of their own roots, and then pause over the places as if sewn together.
But if pain with bleeding comes, then you should cauterize those with a lanticular subtle cautery.
And the best cautery is to do it near the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Ninth Chapter.
Treatment of Grandeyss Which Afflicts the Eyelids of Men.
Many times it happens that in the eyelids of men some cause arises which is akin to grandeyss in its strength and hardness, and therefore grandeyss is called.
And it is an accumulation of great humidity below and above the eyelid.
Therefore the operation on them is that you should consider whether the grandeyss is proceeding from there in what appears to be from the eyelid and spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore pour over that with a fissure by latitude, and then extract all of it from every part with facility until it evaporates, and then suspend that with an onyx and incise it.
And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is little, then you will not suffer harm from it because the humor of it restores that and incarnates.
And if the grandeyss is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outwardly; and then ease the eyelid and suspend the grandeyss with an onyx, unless you are obliged to incise it, and press that from every part; and if the eyelid by incision becomes lengthened, this will not be noticed in any cause.
And then the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and cure the place with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Tenth Chapter.
On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axirnah is a greyish substance which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and most commonly affects children, aggravates their eyes and causes great pain to them; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are shed upon them.
And therefore you should take those to weep over their faces all the time, and sleep on their faces; and so the eyelids of theirs above become humid, which have already been covered with inflammation, and the imminent danger is apparent in the eye; and when you press the place with those said remedies, you will bring forth an abscess within them.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his head over the said spot, and then pause cloth of linen on both sides and make a poultice, and make a circle according to the quantity contained by arthernach from every part; and then pause that over that and press with those said remedies so that an abscess may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then pour into the middle of that humid atmosphere with a spatula incised with a fissure by latitude, and the fissure not be greater than the one made in flaubotomy.
But in the beginning it is necessary to cut through all the cord until you reach the abscess, because in the most difficult processes abscesses are formed by fissure according to the form of white greyze.
Therefore extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said remedies to the outer parts and roll back and forth between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the spatula you may not reach the eye and thus damage it.
But if there is no abscess in the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust in the fissure a little with facility until the abscess processes; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of linen in water and vinegar, and apply them to the spot and stretch those with powders.
And so some people that find salt apply it to the spot in the cavity of the fissure, so that this which remains of that humidity may be absorbed.
And then cure that until it is healed.
But if an apostema forms in the spot, then cure that with cauterizing poultices until it is healed.
Eleventh Chapter.
On Manners of Touching the Eye.
When in the eyelids of men there are noted changes by adjusting below the natural lashes and so becoming antiquated, then those things do not pertain to the eye and make happen manners of illness thus as constant tears and softening of eyelids and skin until that becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye; and there are four cures: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made by atactini through incision and suturing; or by cannas as you will say.
And therefore it is necessary to pause the head of the patient in the said spot; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good is; and otherwise, insert a needle into that part which is faithful from the outermost edge of the eyelid below the palpebra, and make the needle penetrate above, and thus be - near the margin of the palpebra in the place where there are no lashes - near the lashes, and pull the thread upwards to the parts above the palpebra, and convert it with a ray.
And then pour into the outermost part of the eyelid below the lashes with a spatula incised with a lacrimal major thread to the lacrimal minor; and then extract the needle and pause below the eyelid, powdered with small amounts of cotton or cloth, and then send above the eyelid with a tent, and be thus like a figure of myrtle leaf.
But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of heaviness of the eyelid, because this is diverse among men, because some of them require that a great amount of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then pour with the spatula onto the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is like that near the natural lashes as is the greatest thickness of a king.
And then place the onyx in one of the two angles of the cord, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with a stitch the two lips together with a subtle woolen thread or needle, and cleanse the blood, and cause to adhere what superfluous threads remain above the two eyelids with some causes being considered, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not cure.
And then loosen the stitch of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches, and cure that with what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is lifted by the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of it; but stitches are better. Therefore I say thus to the ancients who taxinate.
But however in that it is sought after by the patient, and is of good operation, and not in him fear.
And there is another manner in taxinating, and it is that you draw on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and constricted threads according to this form:
But if it is not possible to take the threads, and that is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and then enter the other thread next to the lacrimal major, and the second thread next to the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said remedies the threads with equality, and then raise with those your hand with equal elevation, raise all the cord above which is drawn as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that until it is healed.
But if an apostema forms because of your incision or your fissure, then take that apostema with a cauterizing agent and apply it to the area, and make it resemble a berry.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted so that its own lashes are turned into something else, then it is necessary to use in that what we have said about incision; but suturing in each case is more artificial.
Atactinir with cannes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and then by art, make two cannes or two subtle astels of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of them is less than the latitude of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each party, where you have the threads.
And then add each one with subtlety above what superfluous eyelid remains of the eye, and constrict the cannes of each party with a very tight stricture, and leave it for some days, because the cord through the stricture will die and become denatured and will settle into its place as soon as it is set free.
But if it is delayed, then break off the thread and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the lashes do not prickle.
And this is the form of two cannes which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and latitude neither more nor less.
Twelfth Chapter.
On Lifting of Prickly Hairs on the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and prickly hairs on the eyes, then the operation in that is that you take a subtle needle and insert it into that thread of soft and white wool, and then adjust the extremities of it with great subtlety. And let the length of the threads be of a quantity equal to one palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that one if you wish to.
And then place the patient's head in the said spot, and be near the sun so that your work may be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted to the one that has required engineering, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out above and insert it into alignment, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
And then pull your hand with that until the hair is lifted out of alignment in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if it is lifted out of alignment and the hair is not lifted, then lift it to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with that, until it is lifted out of alignment from above.
And then look at that with the vision of the eye, because you will lift it out of alignment and the thread, and grasp each one and lock the eye, and leave the lock for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows well on top of that good flesh.
And if the hair is too short, then you adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is lifted with that, or let it settle until it is lengthened to fit into some space, and then you lift that.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On the Cure of Echacritation, which appears in the eyelid above.
When it appears in the eye echacritation, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this echacritation or is natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The manner of the operation in this case is that you break up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary for you to use a cure on that of the causes which dry out and constrict; because if you do so, the echacritation will return worse than never before.
Use in that a cause that softens like fenugrec, and mix with the water in which they are cooked and sown with linseed, or with a yolk of egg, which is liquefied with some oil, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you open up with all artifice that is not consolidated according to the form in which it began.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of echacritation that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On the Cure of Echacritation which is made in the eyelid below.
This echacritation which is made in the eyelid below, which is indeed named truly echacritation; and it is of some natural, other accidental.
But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or by other similar things.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and cut it with the needle, and insert with a spatula wide. And then if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, good is; and otherwise, take the thread and pause that in the cut figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the left side of the eyelid below.
And let the ends of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and let it be a done angle such that when they come together, it forms a figure of its own.
And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
And then hold back the flesh that way by the quantity that is the left side of it, below which the eyelid is.
And then adjust the separate parts and sew them together with a thread of wool; and then cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if echacritation occurs through a fissure or suture or cauterization, then you must make an incision with a flat fissure on the eyelashes of the eyelid as it was before. And then separate it with a poultice between two lips, as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of echacritation when it is above or below, let it flow in that operation, according to its preparation in the form of echacritation, and that is in a form of various diversities.
And the skilled artisan prepares artifice in every possible way that is possible to him, so that he can return the figure to its natural form, or nearly so, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many men, it is necessary that the eyelid be solidified more above than the album of the eye, and be prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore you must insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it with a needle.
And then you must insert the adhesion with a spatula that is not sharp like the incisions, having a little obtuseness so that the patient will not be disturbed by the operation, and leave the spatula that it will not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it will easily excise that adhesion so that the eyelid can return to its natural form and all the adhesion can be healed.
And then you put into the eye salted water with which you wash; or distill upon it dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of wool, and pause above the eye lanolin infused into the albumen of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On the Incision of the Nail and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimals.
Know that the nail is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and resembles a hard, subtle cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed humidity, which when it touches iron, or is forced to take with an onyx, is abscinded and the onyx does not stick in place.
And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, which gradually becomes smaller as it covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
But the manner of operating in this case is that the patient places his head in the said spot, and then you work on the eyes of him, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with an onyx of little duplication and stretch it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a horse's hair or cow's hair or ox's hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, and double the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread; and stretch it to the parts above, and excise the hair on the side of the nail which touches the pupil. And thus you will follow that with the hair into the last part of it.
And then you must incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal with a spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal alone so that by incision of it there is no continuous flow of tears.
And some days later the nail with the stretched onyx or thread, as we have said, and then it must be excised with a lion's spatula, whose form is this:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunic of the cornea and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
And then the incision gets in the eye a little bit of salted water or made from cypress to equalize it, and leave it for another day; and then cure that with what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is the onyx stuck in it, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed like this, as you and I have recounted in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you will work on the eye of the patient and take a spatula lion with a subtle edge, sharp like this: with subtlety. And if sometimes that is rarefied and becomes confused and enters into it, then you must distill from your hour on the eye of cypress made from siniar or with rosy eyes or with salted water, and anoint the eye until another day.
And then iterate on that the operation until all that is of it is remade, but not the contrary apostema that is in the eye, because you must leave it and cure at first the apostema until it is healed.
And then iterate your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the eye with great harm, is suspended with onyx; and incise that from one part, and do not finish the incision lest you excite a flow of tears.
And then distill on the lacrimal rosy eyes and made from siniar until it is healed.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On the Incision of Algae and Water Born from Flesh Adjusted in the Eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is over-paused until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches above the eyelids and strongly compels the eyelids to be lifted towards the outer parts and is assembled like a rose on a balcony.
But the operation in this case is that the patient places his head in the said spot; and then you work on the eyes of him and collect all that flesh with suitable onyxes and water, and take that with a forceps or with a casket; and then incise the flesh at first until everything is finished with the encisor, and beware of the eye that it does not scratch it as you perform your operation.
And so your incision is with which you incise those or with spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected according to what will be the form of it, close to this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is remade, then fill the eye with salted water, or distill upon it a red powder and similar to that of corrosive medicines, and pause above the eye outside, covered with albumen of egg, until you are assured of apostema's caution.
And if there remains some cause of algae and it is governed with caution, and you fear apostema's caution, then leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with water which causes that apostema to cease, and then iterate on that with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which occurs in the eye of this species.
But nevertheless you must know that you should alienate all cure of the eye from natural or accidental means, work with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member is sufficient for that operation.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Scales come forth red ones which are hardened on the eye and prohibit it from its natural operation, and uncover the eye in length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at first that you consider whether the eye in which there are scales is strong and in it there is no other disease than scales, then you must collect those scales.
And it is that you command the patient to place his head in the said spot, and then suspend those veins with one onyx or two according to your prudence; and that onyx of subtle duplication, as follows:
or two onyxes gradually in one case, as follows:
And then they are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins to be remade in the eye and turned around.
And beware that you do not scratch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed, then you must distill on the eye green or red powder so that with its sharpness it corrodes the water which is remade from the scales.
But if this is not possible for you, then collect all in that hour, and afterwards apply all the water which relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and you are assured of apostema's caution.
And then iterate on that according to the same manner, until it is healed.
And this is the form of forceps:
Nineteenth Chapter.
On the Reduction of Swellings in the Nose.
When you cure swellings with a cauter or sharp medicine, and they do not follow the narration of it and are not healed, then do not engage in it at all, but rather make incisions on the apostema until its maturity is reached, and extract all the moisture that is in it and pour it into it so that the bone is uncovered.
And therefore, when the bone is uncovered and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you must scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called "aspre cap", and it is made of iron, and it has a red point on the top just like a cherry stone that is made pointed by lime or calkification through subtle punctation (just like it is in this form).
And then pause that on the corrupt part of the bone, and gently rock it between the said points, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is gone.
And then make it some times, and afterwards restore the place with drying and stimulating causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the sickness has been excised and remains for 40 days, and does not renew itself and does not apostematize, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then there is no use in it but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover from below with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take a thread according to this form:
Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it be first exhausted until the extremity is just like that.
And then pause that on the bone, and be it near to the lacrimal; and stretch out your hand a little from the eye, and then revolve your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by sensation as if it were going to come out through that when you withdraw your hand.
Therefore, then restore the place with stimulating and drying medicines, just as if it were a wound.
Therefore, since the flesh and the place are indurate, then the material which flowed to the outer parts returns to the nose, therefore this is more gentle on the patient.
Twentieth Chapter.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
When the eye eminence grows to its totality and does not cause harm or diminution, then you must loosen the patient, and afterwards follows, and pause for gentle breathing in the chest without scarification and suckle for good sucking; and then pause on the eye with a liniment made from catarrh, aloe, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster over the eye with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's wool, and each cloth be duplicated into four folds; and make from those materials.
And then pause on top of each other according to the quantity that the eye needs. And then strengthen over those with a cloth of hard and strong fabric; and iterate the poultices with sucking without scarification; and then remove the poultices and leave the eye straight for the day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament is relaxed, then it is necessary to make it strong again.
And then remove the ligament at about day and night, just as we have said.
And if the eye is already reduced, well and good; but if not, then iterate the plaster with powders, and strength, and poultices until it is healed.
Twenty-First Chapter.
On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
When endevous disrupcion occurs in the uveal tunic, and it is elevated and proceeds outside the eyelids just like a grain of mustard, and its shape resembles that of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation in it is just as we have recounted, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left behind, and put the other needle into the double filament on the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double filament and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that much.
And then extract the needle and pause on the eye with wool infused in egg white and leave it until the thread falls onto the uvea.
And then cure the eye with this water which comforts it, so that the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to its great elevation, and then it is perforated by a subtle spatula which comes to the forefront of the eye, and flow the humectant albuginea, and descend the eye and enter soon.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On the Cure of Alconitis.
This disease which is called alconatis is nothing but a humor that is adjusted in the eye, resembling descending water and not being so.
But the manner of working with it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight bed, and then take their head in your hands, grasping two parts, and make them look down until you see the humor come to the outer parts, and then dry it up and not let it flow, and be careful not to obstruct the light, and the patient sees the causes just as they see.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with the water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and find it on the panniculus cernent a small portion of the continuation of the conjunctiva on the cornea in the crown (up to the location you see), until the humor is forgotten.
Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you must distill on the eye cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On the Cure of the Water that Descends from the Eye.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable to be perforated by a declaration of sermon, then that one according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands on a mat and tie their own eye shut with a strong bandage.
And then pause with your left hand near the eyelid of their own eye, if the eye in which the water is flowing is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
And then with your right hand take a small sponge, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
And then pause the extremity of the sponge near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and then squeeze the sponge with force and revolve your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that the sponge has already reached the cause of the vision.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the sponge to the forefront be the measure of the space which is the size of the pupil from the beginning of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see through the pupil with the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause the sponge in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends at once, you will see the patient's vision restored over which their sight had been impaired, and the sponge in their own eye.
And then pause for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, you will then lay that sponge down again before it is removed.
And therefore, when it is dry and does not descend, then you will extract the sponge with ease, and revolve your hand around it a little at a time, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear gemstone salt and with that wash the eye inside; and then pause outside the eye, coto or stopa or wool infused in rose oil and egg white, and tie the eye shut with water.
But we, those of our time, pause on that which is mixed with albumen in egg white.
And if it does not obey your sponge in the instrument of the eye by its hardness - for some of the men whose eyes are very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
And then pierce with it that conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, but rather make a way for the sponge to enter the subtle location.
And then insert the sponge according to what we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's bed for sleep, made in a dark and quiet room, where they will lie on their back, and be prohibited from all movements.
And pause in the natural state of it so that its nature is aligned, and not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the ligature be according to its disposition for three days.
And then remove that in the darkest and most obscure place, and make the patient's vision free, and cause them to see some things, and then return the ligature on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that you do this during the hours of treatment or shortly before infusion. They had to be careful because the water flows more quickly and strongly due to great and violent consideration.
But if it happens that an abscess forms, then you must remove the eye before the seventh day, and correct it with water that will dissolve the abscess.
Then you must absolve the vision of him and pause on his face near the mouth for which it is governed, that he may be regulated in his excessiveness for some days, existing in the darkest place.
And then gradually be freed from that dark place and converse with his own causes.
And know that in all cases the disciple is not exempt from some vision at times, and then you must be bold over the operation.
And it has already been mentioned to us of some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that fire was made in the Ayrac, magnificently perforated in which the water is sucked.
But however you have not seen it done in our land which has perfected this, nor have you read about it in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magnificence by which one may be above those who do not know them:
And they are made of iron or steel properly, and they are the extremities of their own form with this subtlety triangularly, the sharp end just like that is the form.
Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Cure of Meat that has gone Bad in the Nose.
When in the nose are born various meats, adjusted from which some cause is assembled like that of Scorpio's weight or Polyp's flesh; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that flesh represented. And from it comes a cancerous, lapidated, and dark-colored meat; and from it comes the lion's flesh not of dark color.
Therefore, in those that are not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and breathe through their nose, and pluck out the tumor from those meats. And then extract that from the outer parts, and then incise it with a sharp spatula of subtle instrumentality on one side until you know that all the meat has been removed; if there remains any cause by which abscess is possible, then you must ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains. But if the lord has an abscess or an apostema forms, then you must pause at that place which is necessary; or it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize it until the abscess is abscinded and all the cavities are removed.
And then be freed from the nose, near the incision, with water or wine. But if the nose is open and there is moisture processing into the palate, then you will know that it has already been healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is meat gone bad in the pustules above the bones of the nose, to which abscess has not been absorbed.
Therefore, it is necessary that you enter faithfully into the one with some thickness, and noise in the mouth noises, and pause between each noise the quantity of the said or less, and engender the patient and enter one extremity of the thread into the nose by means of the ray or another cause which is possible to him.
And since this will have been done, that he attracts his own odor into the channels of the nose, and be exhaled on his gullet, for many times the resemblance to this action makes the children at school, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do so.
And then pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a seal of meat to the noises that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the meat is already absorbed by the noises of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and pause in the nose, near the abstraction of blood, a small quantity, and do this for three days or more until the engendered corrosion is completely consumed by what remains of the meat.
And then in the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead canal for several days until it is healed.
But if you degenerate from the cure that exists, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a capipurge, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make this of silver or iron, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small shell, and the metal similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed canal like a reed, and the canal of the instrument to make a capipurge maker should be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you will take that when you need it in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes susceptible.
Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Worms Born in the Extremities of the Nose.
Many times it is born a worm in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased over several days until one can see its regard.
And therefore you must incise that in the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all that. And then pause over the place or cauterize or use medicine which is in location at that spot.
But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is lapificated, hard, of dark color and little sentiment, then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times he who incises this apostema devotes great malice against him whom it had.
And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and it is possible to incise in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the location with what exists and constrain into until it is healed.
Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ear when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarity.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in certain men.
Therefore, when it is necessary to adjust some cause of those, you must consider if it is fresh wound with the patient's blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and properly cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the continuity dissolution are already separated, and each is made whole, then you must excoriate each part of its apparent cord until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over those powder blood of dragon and well mixed, and pause over the powder a poultice of definion, or of some other consolidative plaster, and bind that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another plaster and bind that until the flesh is absorbed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
But the manner of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you do and let it be known.
Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the two lips on the parties behind.
Many times it is necessary to take some men on the parties behind their lips, certain hard and similar to grass of errors, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and wounds of each of those hardnesses of all parts, and then fill the location with sagacious powder well mixed into which blood is restrained, and then be washed with wine and be cured in that place with what exists, until it is healed.
Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Incision of the Adjusted Flesh in the Gums.
Great many times, the flesh adjusted on the gums which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with a thread or tie it with the forfecs and incise that as its nature demands, and let the blood run out.
And then pause over the location with sagacious powder or other stiptic or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, because the cauterization will not return.
Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When in the surface of the teeth on the parties behind and those of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some are blackened and are made citrines or green into which the gum goes by this corruption and the teeth become loose.
And therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the top of it in your own seat, and ratify the teeth in which those roughs and causes appear like sand into which no cause remains, and this will be done with respect to the blackness and citrinity and other things until they are cleansed.
Therefore, if this is at the beginning of the reason, good; and otherwise, then you must iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have needed many roots of diverse forms and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And therefore since the roots with which the tooth is rooted in the party behind are another of the roots with which it is rooted between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots should be prepared by you as you will soon see:
Thirtieth Chapter.
On the Eradication of Teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and labor in total eradication of it, for there is no cause that can supply the need of it when it is eradicated, for it is a subtle substance into which an excuse is made in the eradication of it.
But it is necessary that when the patient has been forced to eradicate that tooth, you must firmly certify which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and says it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of barberries.
Therefore, when you have certified which tooth is painful, and you know well, it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, into which the tooth is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and then remove that with your own hands or with subtle forfexs little by little until that is conceived.
And then take in hand strong and great for good speaking or sudden force, and pause the head of the patient between your fingers that hold it so well as not to cause pain, and then remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner that you do not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and put that below the tooth from all parts with facility and effort to remove it in such a way as it was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is cracked or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap a cloth around that crack and tighten it with the tip of a thin thread so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction on it while holding.
And it is necessary that you work exactly with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part behind, and return over the patient for the wickedness that may be greater than the first pain of him.
And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity over the eradication of their own, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be broken than to be bound, and the roots of their removals all, or some of those, or that you extract that with some bones from the jawbone just as many times we have testified.
And then wash the mouth with wine cold or wine hot and salt.
And if there is need of blood to flow thus, just as many times there is need, then take some quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that vinegar does not conduce, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and subtle tongs with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning should be of long extra limb, short handle and thick, so that they are not folded when you must work with them.
And be like times of thick handle so that when you strain with those they are not folded, have short extra limbs.
And be made of Indian iron with descending shapes of right extra limbs, and in the extra limbs of those there are teeth which some intrude into others and strain by construction descent strong, and sometimes the extra limbs of those have the shape of a bird's beak known as ciconia, so it is guarded, and are of strong construction.
Thirty-First Chapter.
On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from Masticated Mandibles.
When you must eradicate the tooth which is broken for some reason, it is necessary that you pause over the location with border for one day or two until the location is softened; and then enter algesti or tongs, the extra limbs of which are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
Their extra limbs are made behind like lime or almond.
And if you do not obey your own eye with these forceps or tongs, it is necessary that you hollow out the root and scrape off all the flesh and enter the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever of this shape:
And it be of short extra limb, thick and small, and not curved so that it is not bent.
Therefore, if the root is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extra limb in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and with a thinner extra limb.
And already you have helped yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, similar to the next one: and with other instruments which precede in shaving of teeth; for then it is made with this instrument which is assembled like once great, and this is the form:
of the triangular extra limb bent or short, which has some thickness, and not curved so that it is not bent.
And another thing you should know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle craftsmen in their art find for themselves according to this what the operation means and the various diseases; because there are diseases to which the ancients did not know nor pause proper instruments, by the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is bent or twisted, then it is necessary to be very careful about that in its place where it is suitable for instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
And be in that place some thickness little by little, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines suitable to this.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then take away that from that fracture and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On the Care of Teeth Exceeding Over Others.
When teeth are exalted and not according to their natural form, and more so when they pertain to women, and more so to venerable maidens; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and it is not possible for it to be sutured or bound together, then remove that; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it resembles a pig's jawbone, and is made of Indian iron with an extra limb very sharp.
And be your incision in which you incise that after many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not like another tooth.
And if it is an exalted tooth exposed to sharpening, then sharpen that with the Indian iron file of which this is the form:
And be all of Indian iron and the edge smooth; and be with many small points like a file at which needles are made, at which the tooth is sharpened little by little in many days with ease, so that it is not another tooth like it and fouls. And then file that at the end, and sharpen that with some roots.
And if it is a tooth whose part is bent and irritates the tongue, then it is necessary that you file that until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and be full so that the tongue does not irritate nor the word corrupt.
Thirty-Third Chapter.
On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
When accidents happen to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot hold on to that which is taken away, and you have cured it with stiptic medicines, and your cure has not been effective, then since it does not decay, take a gold wire and not silver, for silver turns green and in a few days becomes black, but gold never changes.
And be the wire in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the wire and take it double its length between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the wire between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then iterate the twisting until you reach the starting point again, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
And be the twisting in which you tighten the wire around the roots of the teeth so that they do not decay.
And then incise the extra limbs of the wire that are superfluous with forceps or pincers, and add those in each place by gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it as straight as Roman.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another wire in such a way throughout its entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, tied together like these times.
And when it happens that one tooth or two returns to its place, and are reunited as we have recounted, and remain.
And only skilled craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
And sometimes it is suitable for some reason of cow bones, and is made from them like a tooth form, and is placed in the location where the tooth falls out, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Incision of the Ligament which goes to the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
This ligament which goes from the tongue sometimes or is natural to it which one has not, or accidental and occurs by a wound which is already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, and lift up his tongue which exists within himself; and then incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recent stiffness.
But if in that place there is some hardness or nodulation, and it has been fixed by the consolidation of the wound, then you must use forceps and cut it along its latitude until you have cut through the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
And beware that there is not a fissure made in the forehead of the flesh, and that you do not cut too deeply and bring forth a flow of blood.
And then wash the wound with lukewarm water or with hot and cold water in turns, and then pause so that the tongue may relax; thus is the manner in which the patient should leave his tongue relaxed every night so that it will not become consolidated again.
But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the location with a poultice made from vinegar; but if the blood flows, then immediately cauterize the location with a caustic lancet which is suitable for this. And then cure that one and the other causes until it is healed.
Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Extraction of a Ranula under the Tongue.
Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue, resembling a small tumor that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is greatly enlarged until it fills the mouth.
And the operation in it is that you open the patient's mouth, seated before the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard and dry, which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it is turned white, which has moisture, then you should put the instrument in it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and cut it from all sides; and if blood flows to you during your operation, then immediately pause above with a poultice made from vinegar, so as to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have completed it as far as that place, and wash it with hot water and salt; and cure that one with the other cure, as is suitable for this, until it is healed.
Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Abscesses from both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
When an abscess forms in the gullet, it is a glandular swelling that is assembled like a bunch of grapes, which then becomes inflamed and is called two ears; which when you cure them with what we have said in the division, but they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; rather let that abscess mature first, and then either you will break it or it will burst open by itself.
And if it is of a white color, rough, and the root is subtle, then that abscess must be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already subsided and has become complete or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then make sure the patient stands before the sun, with his head in its natural position, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue between his own fingers, holding it with a noble instrument whose form is this:
And be made of silver or iron, and be as subtle as a knife.
Then, as you take hold of that tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and look at it with your own eyes, then take a small instrument and insert it into the abscess, and pull it out in all directions as much as you can. Or another cause that pulls some of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is this:
Or another cause that pulls some of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument whose form is this: and is assembled like forceps, however the extra limbs of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the inward part of another, very sharp, made of Indian iron thoroughly blackened.
But if this instrument is not at your presence, then cut it with a spatula whose form is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one incision, then cut the other one according to this same manner of cutting, and immediately apply a poultice made from vinegar to the patient's wound.
But if there is a flow of blood, apply water decoction of scorzonera or myrtle leaves and similar substances to the causes of stiptics until the bleeding is stopped, and then cure that one so that it may be healed.
And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said about cutting two incisions together.
And you had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her gullet, the abscess which was tending towards a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed up the gullet of hers, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and had already been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and was on the verge of death if you hadn't acted within a day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had taken two days to go through two holes.
So you cut yourself in half and remained stuck in one of the holes, and pulled it out, and there was a great piece torn off, and then you cut into the other hole, and immediately opened her mouth, and grasped her tongue, and then inserted the instrument into that abscess.
And then you cut off a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it. So the gullet of that woman was completely cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, and then you prescribed food for her, therefore you did not cease cutting into that abscess many times over a long period, and subsequent abscesses formed in its place, which were cut into until it was prolonged.
So I went to the top and cauterized her gullet, so that there was no addition; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done with that woman.
Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Incision of a Hovel when it is Abscessed.
When the catarrh settles in the hovel and it is abscessed and long, then it is called a "perpendicular". And if it is on the left side, large and rounded, then it is called a "bubo".
But when it is cured with the water we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with it, and only sometimes that abscess has already become a cicatrix and is subtle, then you must cut into what is added to it and is rounded; and if it is at that length, and is sanguineous, dark-colored or black, and there is no sensation in it, then you must take care of the incision of it, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
And when you cut it according to the manner we have said of its whiteness and length, then you make sure the patient is seated and take hold of her tongue with an instrument whose form I have described, and place the instrument in the nose, and pull that down and cut it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two abscesses.
And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, but only as far as the natural term with no addition, because if you cut too much, you will damage his own speech.
And then use the instrument that we have described in the incision of two abscesses, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is terrified by the incision, it is necessary to use an agent in the cauterization of him without fear, and the manner of the cautery on him is only with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in its natural position, and immediately grasp his tongue with the instrument which we have described, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm it with living cause, and pause it not thick nor subtle, and fill up the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
So the extra limb of it is concave in which the medicine is placed like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient lies on his back so that the saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one flows into the intrinsically contained medicine, so that none of those causes descends upon the gullet of him and bothers it.
And then take your hand and the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for a space of about an hour until you see that one becoming blackened and sedated by the biting action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a syringe above so that the cloth adheres to the canula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it be as is when it dries up and falls apart in three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize the abscess again in the circuit of the uvula with a cloth wrapped around it, and purify what is in the circuit of it with the medicine, and be washed with vinegar water, and be cured outside with an embrocation, and after that with poultices until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is safer than incision and longer in duration.
And sometimes the uvula is cured in this way which is more subtle than cauterization and incision: take calament, hyssop, origanum, ruda, Arabic scicados, camomile, and similar herbs to those, and adjust all or some of these causes in a vessel, and be submerged in hot water, and boil; and the vessel should be well mixed with decent lye, and there should be a hole in the middle of the vessel, above which is placed an iron instrument according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
And then insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor can reach the uvula on the concha, until the uvula is quite obscured.
And then repeat this process many times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, because it would be too strong for the abscess, and you must not do this, but rather wait for the declaration of the abscess to appear.
But if this instrument is not at your presence, then take a cane and compose a bundle of hyacinth on the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient may be closed, because the bundle of hyacinth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Thorns and that which adheres to the Gullet and other Causes.
Many times thorns or splinters from a fish or some other cause adhere to the gullet.
Therefore it is necessary that you extract what is apparent from those thorns or splinters on which the sight falls, and then take hold of the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that to you it may be declared what is in the gullet.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the gullet, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because then the annexed cause of the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or root of lettuce or a bottle of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then make the patient swallow that, so that as it goes to the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten. And then take an eel and bind it tightly with thread, and set it aside for a moment, and then extract it; or take a pipe and insert it and then pull it out.
But if those causes which we have said are not forgotten, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And be more thick than a ray, a little one, and in the extremity of it be concave which you will insert into his gullet with ease.
And let him raise his head upwards, and be careful that the touch of his skull on the gullet is avoided, so that it does not hurt the bone or thorn, or that he puts it into his own hand.
But meanwhile, let the patient himself insert it into his own gullet, by means of his knowledge of the location of the annexed cause and its descent below, and pull his hand with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity which is prepared there until it is forgotten.
Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Sanguineous Matters Annexed to the Gullet.
When the sanguineous matter is medicated with the water which we have said in the division of the cure by medicines and does not agree, then consider the gullet of the patient at sunrise, because you will have compressed the tongue of him with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you find the sanguineous matter, extract it with a small instrument or subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it by that means, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this many times (until the sanguineous matter is dead and falls out of the gullet) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
And then take a vial full of vinegar water, and open the mouth of him in it, and wash his mouth with that; and do not give any other cause or harm to the patient an hour after, because the sanguineous matter soon as it feels the vinegar takes.
But if it is not forgotten according to what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or with assafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended for the suffumigation of the uvula.
And do this, until it is gone.
And there is another way of operation in suffumigation of that, which is that you take a vessel in which are hot coals and the vessel is covered with a covering in the middle of which is a hole; and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then place above the suffumigation; and hold the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the sanguineous matter, because the sanguineous matter will soon fall.
And if it does not work, then you repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water to drink, and make him eat salty causes and almonds, and do not give him vinegar water, and thus it is necessary that according to this regimen it will be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood and sanguineous matter are extracted from the gullet when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps like these, except that it has some curvature in it. The one that is placed in the gullet, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which lime is sharpened, so that when any cause is compressed, it will not let go.
Fortieth Chapter.
In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against abscesses and in section on their treatment.
Abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
And thus diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, one of which is by the species of abscesses themselves; and because they compress the humors.
And the second manner is proper to the locations in which accidents occur in the body, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from the abscess that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
And some abscesses are such that they should not be perforated, but rather allowed to mature with the pus in those or complete their natural course.
And other abscesses are such that they should be pierced when they are hard and not mature according to their natural course, like those that occur at joints. When an abscess occurs near a joint, it prolongs its presence within the circuit of the joint, and soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contractions in that member; or is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it has matured to affect the main limb; or is near the anus, then pierce it unripe; and do not make it ripen through non-completion of digestion, but rather one that is proper to the anus, so that it does not protrude from there and be elongated towards the parts outside the anus, and become a fistula, or that it becomes in the term of life, not healed. But it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it has matured.
And know that it is mature when the cessation of pain and the stopping of fever occur, and then the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the tip of the abscess, and other signs.
And when it is necessary to know that the perforation will occur in the location most distant from the abscess and from the coming of the cure for the prominence.
And the perforation should be done through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in locations such as the lacertars, cords of nerves, arteries; and, finally, in all other locations where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to wait until the perforation of that one is confirmed through completion of digestion, as we have said; because if you perforate that before, it will prolong the body's suffering from that and many other impurities, and soon the lips of that place will be hardened and its depth will increase.
But some abscesses should be perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body, as necessity requires, or according to that which the member demands.
And it is necessary to administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a great perforation and a wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are the abscesses in which it is necessary to concave and enclose the code, when it is done thus that it becomes like a pan and is finished in a term that has already stopped, just as those that occur in many cases of dubiosity and bubos.
And of those that are enclosed by section having three angles; and of those is one which is enclosed like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the gouters.
And among those are some in which round and lunated sections are administered, and resemble those.
But that one to which there is no such thing as abscesses like those of the lion, it is necessary to pierce that with a superficial or plane perforation only.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you perforate that one and do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; having extracted one part, and then plug the abscess on another day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to graduation until it is forgotten.
And most of all if the patient is frail in virtue, or a woman in childbed, or a child in youth, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit many times is resolved by the exit of pus, and soon the patient dies, and you should not open them.
So guard this chapter with great caution, and be careful in your perforation of these abscesses, for it is necessary to cleanse the wounds and consider therefore whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section; then you should administer some lint or old cloth; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause and make each hole go together.
And if in the abscess one part of the cord is cut off or you have concaved it in the circuit, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or a thread made of linen fabric, just as when you drain pans or razors, removing their moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and then process it and cure it with water as needed from the compresses until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer vinegar water and apply it to the areas where the mule has a linen cloth, and pause that over the location of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure and apply powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in winter time, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then it is necessary that you wrap powders in vinegar and oil, and pause those over the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you pause powders wrapped with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, and do everything cold until the third day, just as we have said, and then it is necessary to loosen the abscess and cleanse it and administer what is needed for its cure until it is healed.
And thus this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have said about each abscess in how many ways it should be treated through chapters specifically.
Forty-First Chapter.
Of the section of abscesses that occur in the cord of the head.
In the cord of the head, small abscesses appear, and there are many species of nodes that contain tunics which are in their facts; and the species of them are many.
And among these are pustules, and among those that contain moisture similar to lime. And among these are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling them; and among those that are lapidescent, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should not make the extraction of those that would cause contrariety to the arteries.
And the operation in section of those is that you introduce them with an instrument whose form is similar to this, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then you should cut it with a section according to its length by superficial section in this form:
And begins at the section of the line from .B. to .G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, you should excoriate that part which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause there, because many times it returns if some cause remains.
And then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that part with that liquid, and let it remain for another day, because by this means you will corrode all that remains of that peel.
And then iterate on that cloth with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly, if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that peel; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it according to this form: with a section having the shape of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section and scrape out all that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if your arteries are causing contrariety, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly do in the abscess that is hardened through section and cure according to what we have said; and section on abscess that is hardened is less troublesome, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And some times there are certain ones of these abscesses which are in the head of some men who do not have moisture; the cause is that you cut into an abscess on the head of an old woman and crushed the abscess just like a deaf, harsh, white pustule, which could not be squeezed out, and if it was struck at by anyone, it would hurt.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not like this chapter, just as those abscesses that come to the heads of children and need ear syringing, but the section of these all should be a superficial one.
And pause the perforation in those from the lower part of them, so that the body may be relieved of the pus to the lower parts.
And then cure those with what is needed for its cure.
Forty-Second Chapter.
Of the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and also in the armpits and in the groin area; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many others that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is surrounded by its own tunic, and just as with nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some are hardened, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant ones that do not lend themselves to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Tocament, whose manifest color is related to the color of the cord, and is spread out in all parts, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and it does not push, then you should incise that one with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line from .G. to .B., and scrape out all of that part, and extend the two lips of the cord with one or many cuts if necessary, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the spatula not be very sharp, so that it does not cut too deeply and adjust to your hand as you incise, or that it will trouble the patient, and that you do not cut into something that is not necessary to cut; because if you cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound with vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding, strengthen the wound, and let it remain until the abscess's acuteness subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to be purged. When the blood is evacuated.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then examine the indications of your master said if there is any remaining cause of other small scrofulas, and incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of a large vein, then you should not incise that abscess from its roots. And it is necessary to tie that one with a doubled thread, and let it remain until it falls of its own accord without causing harm.
And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you incise that abscess entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and stitch them together as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation at the location where you see the place of maturation of the pus, and pause in the perforation of that which is below the body, just as we have said.
And then administer the perforation with powder and ointment similar to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then, when you see the wound already cleansed, cure it with ointment of natural flesh until it is healed.
Forty-Third Chapter.
Of the section of the pus of the abscess that occurs in the groin area.
The ancients have described this section as an epilhot, and there is not one man in our land who has made it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those [ancient doctors].
But in men with varicose veins, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this there is no benefit, since all the veins and main vessels of the patient are here.
But in those who have abscesses cutaneous on the mouth or groin area or two ears, when the disease is not in the cane [finger], it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to avoid the damage which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, it is necessary when we want to do this, that we incise the epilhot below three circles of the epilhot, or four with small section by latitude in that which is between two circles as much as possible, so that the section be in cartilage, not in bone, and this location is suitable for section, because it is bereft of flesh and the blood vessels are distant.
And if the doctor is hesitant, then it is necessary that he extend the cord of the groin area with one incision, and then cut the cord into the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the cipilach according to what we have recounted; and it is indicated on the section of the canal by the flame which is from that place and with water which is from there broken down and by the abscess of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is re-matured in which perforation is feared, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and stitch it alone except for the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal until it is healthy.
And Albucasis says that the sum of this sermon which we have recounted is an exposition, and it is not just to see that some of those abscesses had already opened up the groin area of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the vital force has been exhausted, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
And therefore I command to leave the wound open until the malevolence of the disease is consumed; and it is malevolent for three days; and then I command thus: close the wound, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a cauterizer and applied it to his groin area, and incised a part of the lung's cane, and you were called to cure him, and he was groaning like one who is dying, and I uncovered the wound and found the blood which had flowed from the wound small.
Therefore you were confessed that he had not incised a vein nor a nerve, and the breath was coming from the wound, and I cured it until it was completely healed.
And there was no accident to the servant except that he had difficulty in his voice, and then after some days he returned to improvement of his physical condition.
And now I say to you that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Forty-Fourth Chapter.
Of the section on abscess which occurs in the groin area outside, and is called groin hernia.
This abscess, named groin hernia, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no remedy for healing.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one resembles grassy nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess made by the constriction of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it is not necessary to make presumptions about him except for one who is small. And then you should probe that and investigate it with the said, and if you find it resembling grassy nodes, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it as for nodes, and extract it with water which contains the peel and bursicles; and otherwise, then it is necessary to search out all his being, and then cure the location where it needs healing until it is healthy.
Forty-Fifth Chapter.
Of the section on the kinds of nodes.
Of the nodes, many species and I have already said all their species in the division.
And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence, so as to avoid doubt.
Therefore you say that with excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of superfluity is stilled; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the cartilage lion which is at one's own sac proper.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus like a vessel, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, because either they are grassy and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary that you expose it and inquire into it at its beginning with a stirrup which is called an intro-mus, according to what will be said in the chapter that is approaching this one.
And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, that you take this stirrup and insert it into the most humid location which you find in the abscess, and you rotate those little fingers with it gradually until you know that the stirrup has penetrated the cord.
And then withdraw your finger according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the stirrup and observe what is situated in the vestige of it.
And if the moisture that flows is forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
And if from the vestige of the intro-mus there is no moisture, then you should know that it is grass.
And dry on it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form: just as you have been taught, and suspend it with one incision, and excise the cord from all parts with ease, and preserve the peel or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times there will be nothing left, and then you should extract it piece by piece until there is no remaining cause from it.
For if there remains no cause, little or much, the node will return as before.
And if you see that there remains a small part of it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which has abscessed cautiously, and cure that other with another cure until it is healthy.
And if the node is large, then you should stitch together its two lips and cure that with what it embodies.
But if the pulse vein is opposite to it, or non-pulsating, then you should apply and rub the location with vinegar mixed with trisitium that is vitriol, and let it stay for two days or three until the wound is poulticed and the ebullition of blood subsides; and then return to incising what remains of the node.
Forty-Sixth Chapter.
Of the forms of instruments necessary in section and perforation.
Of those which are the forms of intro-mus, and there are three species, that one is great, and from it is half, and from it is small.
The form of great intro-mus is this:
The form of small intro-mus is this:
They are made of iron, with a rounded end and a curved tip, so that they can be inserted into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
And there are three species, that one is great, half, and small.
The form of great instrument is this:
The form of half instrument is this:
The form of small instrument is this:
So that they are suitable for those abscesses, excrescences, and fistulas, and buboes, because among these there are some of the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, and large like great needles with which the sewings are sewn, and they are made of lead citrine, or of lead, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are when they are made of lead citrine.
And they are made of black lead instruments, which are suitable for those in which the fistulas open up in the conquest of which reflections are reflected, and which are reflected back into their own light with those reflections.
And there are three species, that one of them is long, and the others half-long, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of great instrument made of lead:
Form of half-instrument made of lead:
Form of small instrument made of lead:
The forms of knives are many species, that one is simple, which has only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and half.
And among them are some knife handles, and there are three species.
And among those, some knives have two curvatures, and there are three species.
And among them, some knives have three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of small simple knife, form of it:
Form of great knife having two curvatures: Form of half-knife having two curvatures: Form of small knife having two curvatures:
Form of great knife having three curvatures:
Form of half-knife having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are sectioned and excised, and there are three species, that one is great, another half, and another small.
Form of great scalpel:
Form of half-scalpel:
Form of small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, nor are they paused in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done wisely in the excision of the nodes, the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for that reason the patient should be healthy and have tranquility soon after the adjustment which is found to be necessary for the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of lancets, and there are three species: great, half, and small, just like needles.
They are made of lead and resemble a ray, with which alcohol is distilled.
And it is at the extremity pointed with a hidden spatula and in that corner, there are passages outside and inside, when you want, just as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the teeth of the jaws of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, half, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of aspirators with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: great, half, and small; the forms of it:
They are made of lead citrine, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
And it is necessary that you have these species of aspirators: great, half, and small, in order to absorb the flow of blood with speed in need, and afterwards when there is no medicine.
However, you should not use these to absorb blood in every part of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy areas, just as in the folds of the thighs and hips, and in the folds of the arms, breasts, belly, and groin, and similar to their fleshy parts.
And some times they are made of those small instruments resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is absorbed when it is cut off by phlebotomy, or by incision of vein or artery.
And some times they are made rounded according to this form:
Forty-Seventh Chapter.
Of the cure of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflated when they start to be fat, and then the breasts become swollen, and similar to women's, and full of abscesses, far away.
And to him who has this affliction, it is necessary that he incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise all the swelling, and then fill the wound with medicinal flesh, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suturing, and cure him until he is healthy.
But if the breast declines to the folds and is softened by its magnitude, just like in women, then it should be cut into two parts, each containing a pus-filled cavity, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, where each section is contained within the other until the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line from B to G. And then excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders that are necessary for the cure until he is healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the anxiety of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a poultice submerged in corrosive vinegar and leave it until the corrosion is gone from the grayish discharge, and then cure him until he is healthy.
Forty-Eighth Chapter.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from behind the titillate.
Those abscesses that come from behind the titillate are of the species of scrofulae, hard ones, which contain a bag-like peel.
And of those abscesses some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, then you should fill it with a poultice and leave it until the next day.
And then the poultice should be stopped and cured with a suitable dressing, until he is healthy.
And if the abscess of the species of nodes is, and of scrofulae, then you should cut on it just as we have said in the section on scrofulae equally.
And if the wound is extended to such an extent that it becomes a poultice, then you should apply a cautery to it according to what we have said before.
Forty-Ninth Chapter.
Of the section of abscesses that occur by artery or vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the cord is consolidated which is above it, many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is caused by the artery it is long and aggregated in the groin of the body; and when you palpate the abscess with those fingers, you feel a stridor there.
And that which is due to the vein is round about the visible part of the body.
And the section on this abscess is an error, and more so in those that are located near the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
But on that which is caused by the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut along the cord section in the long direction; and then apply the section with scissors and then apply it to the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
And then put on the needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double thread in two places, which is what causes you to extract two arteries that are located in the temples.
And then push the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is released and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer the cure in which fire is generated until the ligaments fall apart; and then cure that with suitable dressings to it, until he is healthy.
And if the abscess is caused by a section of vein, then it is necessary for you to take with your hand as much water as is possible from the abscess and the cord, and then insert the needle behind the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a single ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligature of two parts with two extremities of a thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert a double thread with that needle behind all the abscess, and make the first incision of the needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
And then cut the abscess in the middle of it, so that when what is inside it comes out, you will incise the excess of the cord, and leave what remains tied.
And then stop on the poultice which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with some powders and dressings until he is healthy.
First Chapter of the Abscess that occurs due to Torsion of Nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs through their percussion or occurs due to excessive fatigue, and similarly.
And it is made the most in the places of the assistants or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
And it is a grave abscess, and it is similar in color to the other flesh, and it is located in the places where there are major dispositions of the nerves, and when it is straitened with great vehemence, one feels in it as if the patient were stuporous.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the groin of the body, and therefore it is left alone, and he is damaged on all sides and does not go to the parties before or behind.
Therefore those that are in the joints should not be treated with iron, for fear that it would cause a contraction.
But if it is in the head or forehead, then cut the cord with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take that with forceps and excise that from the roots.
And if it is great, then suspend that with scissors, and excise that, and then stop that; and adjust the wound with suture, and cure that until he is healthy.
Fifty-First Chapter.
Of the Section of Abscess which occurs in the Cheek that occurs in the Belly.
I will describe to some men many times in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those which are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
And you have already seen one, and in the belly of it there were two fungi-like growths, which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with thin roots.
And already the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Therefore you incise them and take away in one part what weighs 18 ounces. and the other part, which is 6 ounces.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider at first if the patient is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, humid, with thin roots; then you cut it with a spatula, and it should be in your presence before the fire, because many times the section of it will expel much blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient pale and trembling, beware of incision with iron; but take a thread of lead, freshly made, and tie it around that abscess, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on that abscess until it is excised and falls apart through its own fatigue.
But if the abscess is of thick roots, then in the incision of it there may be some cause for fear and dread, and especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you excise most of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then cure him until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to excise the abscess which is of a foul color, with little sensation, and with no regard, for that is an absolute cancer.
And you will come to the remembrance of cancer in this way.
Fifty-Second Chapter.
Of the Cure for the Eminence of the Navel.
The Eminence of the Navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is above the belly, and you see that it is a tear or bagging according to what develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from vein or artery as previously said, or by ventosity constricted in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and by bulging of the belly, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it will appear in diverse situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the belly, then the situation of that with water which we have recounted, is more violent and diverse, and as you apply that with those threads I said is hidden, and then returns; and soon after it appears in the same place, and is magnified much by the introduction of bathwater and violent labor.
But if it is due to humidity, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when you apply with your hand, nor is it constricted or creased.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears declining towards blackness.
But if it is due to no flesh, then there is a grave, large, and hard abscess, and it is situated according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to ventosity, then the touch of it is painless.
And the operation in it is that you consider at first if the eminence of the navel is due to blood from artery, or vein, or ventosity; then it is necessary that you are forbidden from curing it, because in that case there is fear and dread, just as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by artery and vein.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to the belly or the cicatrix, then you must command the patient to take hold of his own ale and stand erect; and then send a servant into the circuit of all the navel, and command him to stand opposite between your two hands, and then surround with a spatula lat in the circuit of the navel over the place which has been indicated by the servant; and then extend most of the abscess to the upper parts with a large thread; and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a cord and do it decently.
And then insert the middle of the abscess that has been extended over the ligament and introduce the said thread into it and ask for the belly; and if you have not found or guarded it by the ligament, then you will extract the remaining portion and push the belly towards the parts inside the belly.
And if you have found the cicatrix, then take that with a thread; and cut away the excess from it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that with force, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, so that they will penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts above the needles.
And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the place until the flesh extended falls away on its own; or cut that when it becomes soft and falls apart, and then cure it with water as needed for the dressings until he is healthy.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to no flesh or humidity in it, then you must conquer the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or humidity which you find there, and then cure it with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Fifty-Third Chapter.
Of the Cure for Cancer.
We have already said, in the division, about the type of cancer and how it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid curing it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is generated by excessive and careless treatment of the wound.
And they said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just like the one that is in the nipples or in the armpits and its similar appearance on the limbs assigned to remove all of it, and especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and large, you should not attempt to remove it, for I have not seen nor heard of anyone who has been able to cure such a cancer.
And the operation in it is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black cholera several times, and then sign him with the abscess if it is found full and manifest.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is located for the operation, and then prohibit him from using any thread or needle that could be used on him; and then concave all parts with a good suture so that there remains no cause for the roots of it. And then let the blood flow and do not absorb it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
But if you find that the thick blood is obstructing the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another treatment until he is healthy.
Fifty-Fourth Chapter.
Of the Cure for Hydrocephalus.
We have already recounted, in the division, about the types of hydrocephalus caused by water and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of hydrocephalus caused by dropsy alone, and it is not approached with iron to the type of tympanic meninges or to the type of hypochondriac, for that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this type of hydrocephalus caused by tympanic meninges with medicines and it does not improve your treatment, then consider this, for if the patient has already suffered debilitation, or is afflicted with another malady, such as dropsy in the chest or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat him with iron, for fear is above that.
But if you find the patient full of virtue and abundance, and in him there is no other malady except for hydrocephalus alone, and not an infant nor an old man, then the method of the operation on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to him accordingly, expressing the belly with his own hand, filling the water at the departure from the penthouse, and take a spatula with spines according to this form:
with two sharp edges long, with a sharp extremity just like a spatula; but however there should be some smallness in it little by little, so that in the operation on him it does not penetrate into the belly and cause harm to him.
And then consider if the generation of hydrocephalus is from one of the bellies, for then it is necessary that you, with the section, move away from the navel by three times the width of the said parts, on the right side of the belly above the penthouse.
But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three times.
And if the generation of it is due to biliousness, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the side where the patient intends to lie down, so that the excess fluids do not flow towards that location freely.
And then perforate with the instrument all the way through the cord, and then enter into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the cord and the siphon, and extract it; if it is about the length of a thumb or thereabouts.
And then perforate the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the location where the water is, and it is the location of the fluid. And then extract that and enter with an instrument which has this form: and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of iron or of bronze lion, to which at the lower part of it is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut off in the shape of a feather, as you see:
And at the uppermost part of it is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that armilla will immediately cover the instrument, so that it evacuates the water in the same moment, for if you evacuate more than what is needed at that hour, soon the patient will die from resolution of his animal spirit or else he will suffer a collapse which approaches death.
But evacuate it according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what is signified by your observation of the patient's disposition from the pulse of it and from the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused by what is retained by the cord that retains the hole which is above the cicatrix of which I have recounted to you that it should be perforated in this manner.
And then repeat the instrument to another day if you find that the patient can tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days on fear, and beware of error until there remains little water.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a great quantity of water, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and moisten his head with vinegar, and wait for a long time in the sun; and cure him with desiccative medicines until he is healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the liver and gallbladder in accordance with the extraction of water as I have recounted above.
Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
Of the Cure for Children Who are Born with Unperforated Urinary Tracts.
Sometimes one of the children is born with an unperforated urinary tract (or a narrow orifice that is not in its normal location).
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the perforation as soon as they are born with a fine spatula in this form:
And then pause in the orifice a small lead clip and tie it, and leave it for three days or four times.
And when it is time to urinate, let it be restrained and hold back the urine; and then return that clip.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not close this opening.
But that one whose orifice is narrow should be medicated with a lead clip as we have said, for several days until it is expanded.
But those in whom the orifice is not in its normal location are led to this condition because of them, that which is born and comes out is blocked at the end of the urethra, so it cannot urinate into the lower parts, until it raises the urethra with his hand to the upper parts; and it is not a natural generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rightness, and it is a very bad illness.
And the method of the operation on him is that the patient should be positioned with his back against your left arm, and then extend the head of the urethra with your hand, using a violent extraction, and incise the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as it is done with a feather or by cutting out some part, so that the middle of him will be similar to the head of the urethra and the opening will fall in the middle place according to what is needed.
And beware that in your operation of bleeding, many times this happens; and pause then at the moment when you are going to cut the vein, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Fifty-Sixth Chapter.
Of the Abscess which occurs in the Prepuce at the head of the Urethra and of its Corruption, Negligence, and Adherence to the Head of the Urethra.
Many times this abscess occurs in the urethra and is an eminence of bad flesh.
And one of these abscesses is malignant, and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, should be suspended with a fine thread and cut out completely; and then pause over that spot, anointing it with Egyptian ointment; and then, cure him with divine ointment until he is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, with a bad color, then you must administer a cauterization in the incision and reason of it.
But if the abscess is in the prepuce of the uncircumcised head of the urethra, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then you must open up the abscess that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and then you will cure the one outside, because when you cure it together with the prepuce, there is no guarantee that it will not be torn.
And then also comes corruption in the genitals and prepuce, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all this which has already been denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or which has already corrupted; and then apply a poultice on it with honey, which has been mixed with bran of millet and three-fold torn and crumbled.
And then cure that with the other remedy until it is healed.
But if there is an excessive flow of blood, then administer a lunar cauterization in this form:
for the juvenile cauterization is useful in two dispositions together, that is, in cases of bleeding and when the wound is corrupted.
And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you must introduce a lead cannula into the meatus of the prepuce so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the urethra (and this adhesion only occurs in one who is uncircumcised and has not undergone circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) it is necessary that you excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to separate those adhesions finely, then you must excise with a spatula some cause of the head of the urethra and prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is pierced through its subtlety lightly.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thread of very fine silk, which has been soaked in water so that they do not stick together again.
And then it should be treated with a hot liquid until it is consolidated.
Fifty-Seventh Chapter.
Of the Purification of Children and the Cure for what happens to those who are Circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but rather, it is an operation and will of ours, and theirs is properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and way, losing less of their health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their free books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which is why you have found the majority of craftsmen and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new razor and torre; and they use a thread with a needle and an incision with the finger.
And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not find a better purification with razors, with thread on needle that is used in purification like the finger, because many times you will flee the cord above, because the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and remains the tunic below, and soon it is forced to another incision and sure pain. And the purification made by the Alphabetic method, which is digital, used by barbers, is not ensured of the incision of the extremity of the male member, because it soon enters into the wound itself.
But in the operation with a finger, iron soon blunts and corrupts your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it does not need purification in this way, and I have seen such cases.
But the purification that is done with razors and threads on needle is discovered to me through experience, because the razors are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; and thus when you place your hand so proportionally two sharpnesses, and inscribe them according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the urethra from all sides, without making any mistake.
And the first method of operation is that you should make the child remain for a while, if it is one of those who understand a little, so that you do not do more than to lay the thread in his urethra just once, and then leave him until the next day.
And then make the child happy in all that way, as much as it is possible for him to receive his intelligence. And then make the child stay between your hands most carefully prepared, and not be at all surprised; and hide the razors in your hand or let them remain hidden from sight, so that the child does not see those nor anyone else of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the urethra and blow on the cord, and pull it so that the head of the urethra is reached, and then purify him from what has accumulated in the scrotum.
The form of the razors for purification, this is the form:
The razors are to be so shaped that the tips of the two outer ones should not cut and the other two should cut, in such a way that there is no gap between the handle of the claw, and the length of the two sharp parts should be as long as the length of two hands together.
But the mistake in purification is because soon the internal cord is completely removed or a part of it is left behind during incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extend that part of the hour with your finger in front of the abscess on the location and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot keep it with your finger, then take that part with a thread and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the abscess on the urethra has not subsided, then you must let it be until the abscess is drained, and excise that part with facility, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the urethra, for it will not allow water to pass through.
And therefore cure him with the water which consolidates the wounds, which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised by the cord according to measure, and obeys the parts above, then this will not cause harm to him.
And therefore cure him with the water that we have said until he is healed.
Fifty-Eighth Chapter.
Of the Cure for Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pressure or by blood congested, or by pain or by inflammation, and it resembles those things that we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is very violent upon the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, the form of which is as follows: It should be made of silver and be subtle as a lion's claw, just like a bird's quill with subtlety of a ray long in similitude to half a palm, to which there should be a subtle thread at its head.
And the method of extracting urine with that is to take the doubled thread and place it at the extremity of the skin or wound for good adhesion; and then introduce the extremities of the thread into the part left behind of the urethra, and incise with razors if there is any superfluous cause of the skin, but instead insert it into the quill with vehemence. And then pour the ciringua with border and album of egg.
And make the patient sit on a stool, and insert the quill into the urethra of him and the penis with oil of olive and water.
And then insert the quill with facility until it reaches the root of the penis; and then double the penis above at the part of the belly; and then push the quill into that; and then push that into the urethra, so that the patient is brought to the cause of his pain, and not done as such according to this order, but rather in the way that goes to tortuosity.
And then stretch the thread with the skin little by little, because the urine will dry out the skin.
And then extract that and make it for urinary cure, and use the syringe, do not stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient receives relief.
Nineteenth Chapter.
Of the Quality of Cathartization of the Bladder with Clamp-Crescent and similar instruments which are in accordance with this.
When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood is congested in it, or it is constricted by pain, and you want to cause water and medicines to distill in it, then it should be made with an instrument which is called clamp-crescent, and this is its form:
but at its extremity it is deaf, so it is closed. And in that, there are three holes: two on one side, just like that sometimes.
In the beginning it has a concave location, in which water is poured, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, except when some cause is taken from those humidities, it should be attracted, and when it is expelled, with water it should be attracted, and when it is long, according to what makes clamp-crescent like a naptha in naval battles.
Therefore, when you want to procure humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of clamp-crescent into the humidity, and attract with that water which is poured into the parts above, for the humidity is attracted in the concavity of clamp-crescent.
And then insert the extremity of clamp-crescent into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then pour in the humidity with water that is poured, for that humidity will come to the bladder soon, and the patient will be cured.
Form of the subtle syringe by which the bladder is cathartized, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with its tip being similar to a small feather, and having a thread coming out from the ligature.
And then take the bladder of a living thing, and pause in it the humidity that you want to cathartize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and heat up that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the syringe into the urethra.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity and stricture descending until the patient is cured, because that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a pessary of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that from all its roundness; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, just like they are revolved; and then add the circle just as it is added also to a futura, so that you pour in that water which you want of humidities, oils and waters.
And then you tie that into the instrument and make it just like you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Tenth Chapter.
Of Extraction of Pain.
We have already said in the division the species of pain and its cure by medicines, and the difference between pain generated in the lungs and pain generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
And we have said the pain which is caused by operation with hand and section.
And the pain generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
And you are narrating that with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that the pain generated in the bladder mainly appears to children; and one of its signs is that the urine which comes out of the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and many times pees, and then it is dressed; and with this you will find the fault in the form of those.
And it is easier to cure children from that until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure the elderly. But in young people it is middling because it is between those.
And of that from which the pain is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at first to purify the patient with a cathartic which extracts all the fissure that is in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the ascension of the pain caused by the investigation of it.
And then it is necessary to press the patient with their own feet and be seated and mournful in order that the pain descends into the lower part of the bladder or jumps from one place to another at times.
And then make him sit between your well-prepared hands, and those things of his are left behind, in order that the bladder is made to decline into the parts below.
And then take it away and all that is outside.
Therefore, if you feel the pain in space, then take a seat immediately with section upon it.
And if you do not see the whole of the left hand's touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your said indication of the left hand, whether the patient is a child or a young adult, and insert that into their anus. And take away the pain until it stays behind your said indication. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon it with your said indication, and eject that into the parts outside the location of which you are sectioning.
And command the minister to press the bladder with their right hand; and command another minister to extend the big toe of their left foot towards the parts above, and with their other hand to relax the tendon which is below the big toe, in the part where the sectioning is being done.
And then insert the spatula which is incident to this, and this is its form: and split in it what is between the anus and the big toe, not in the middle location, but before the left side of the cleft; and be the section on that pain and your said indication is in the anus, and be made a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and slightly constricted according to the quantity that you have expelled from the pain, as much as possible, and not more, for fear that your said indication which is in the anus will be overcome by the pain of the section, and it will be forgotten without difficulty.
And know that from the pain there is some which has an angle and margin, so that the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And from that water is like a lion's claw, and is round, and is made for easier extraction.
Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margin, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus, then it is necessary that you guide over it, or strengthen over it with decent gestures, the extremity of which is like a file with which you strengthen on the pain, and do not remove from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot over it, then you should enlarge the hole a little bit, and if you see a flow of blood, cut in strength with nitric acid spread.
But if the pain is more than one, then at first you should press your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert on it; and then press a little bit further ahead; and similarly do so for several more than two.
And if the pain is very great, then ignorance is that you insert that with a large section, for it will happen to the patient one of two causes: either death or a perpetual and continuous distillation of urine, therefore the location is not fully consolidated.
But administer expulsion from it until it is forgotten, or shape in the fracture of it with razors until that which is extracted comes out in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with the sap of aloe and the blood of dragon, and strengthen it. And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in roasted oil and water, so that the abscess may be softened.
And then repose the patient on their own pillow, and do not release the bond for three days.
And when that has been released, wash the wound with water and mild oil, and then cure it with divine ichor and devil's balsam until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is caustic and corrosive, and it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the effluxion of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said indication into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, according to what is needed for the cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary during all the hours of the cure that you lie and adjust both the cloths and the medicines which are paused over the wound.
And if the pain is small and is in the meat of the penis, and is fixed there, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what you previously recommended before reaching section, for many times this cure is accused of section; and now I have tried it out, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron or bronze, whose form is as follows:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
And then take thread, and tie it to that on the penis below the pain, so that it will not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the perforator reaches that pain. And then revolve the perforator with your hand in that pain little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that from one side penetrate to the other; for the urine will soon be released.
And then press your hand on that which is remaining of the pain of the part outside the penis, because it is tight and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits it from being done, then tie one thread below the pain and another thread above the pain. And then insert on top of the pain in that penis between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then release the ligature and purify the congealed blood which is found in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the pain, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, because when you release the thread near the extraction of the pain, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you lift the cord to the upper parts, or that you return to your previous statement, and close the wound as we have said.
Tenth Chapter.
Of Extraction of Pain from Women.
Pain in women is rarely generated.
But if you find pain in some of those [women], then the cure is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of their reasons is that the woman is very virtuous.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman well skilled in discovering whether she has had carnal relations with a man when she is chaste, or is one of those women who have husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth reason is that the location of the section on pain in women is far from the location of the pain, so you need a pre-natal section, and there is fear in it.
But if necessity demands it from you to this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is well skilled and not easily frightened.
But if you are deprived of that, then look for one who is quiet and subtle, or present a mature woman well known in the way of women, or a woman who has separated from this art.
Therefore present that one and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the investigation of the pain to the beginning; which reason is that she should examine if the woman is chaste, then it is necessary that she put her hand into the womb and seek out the pain.
Therefore, if you find that one, cut her off below your said indication, and then command her to insert on top of that.
But if she is not chaste, then command the matron to insert her hand into the woman's private parts and investigate on the pain, since she will pause her left hand over the bladder and compress it with a good compression.
Therefore, if you find that one, then it is necessary to gradually compress her from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts below with the sum of her virtue until she reaches the root of the cleft.
And then insert on top of that the apposition of the majority of the private parts to the root of the cleft, whichever part is in front and center the pain in that part, and let it not be removed from the pain cut off below.
And the section should be small at first; and then insert the rule over that section, and if you feel the pain, adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will cause the pain to be released from there.
And know that the types of pain are many: for some are small and great, and fierce and rough, and long and round, and have folds.
Therefore you know how many species there are of it for that which you signify on what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the location nitric acid spread and tear it apart for one hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
And prepare for yourself the instruments which are said in the extraction of pain in men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the instrument inserted, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with poultices and strictures descending, and do not iterate this; and leave the pain alone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient may die. And then cure the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location has cooled down, then you return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Chapter LXII.
Of Sectioning on an Acute Hernia.
Acute hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which is below the cord of the genitourinary tract containing the urethra, and it is called ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared in the part of the urethra, so that it is cut off as if it were another urethra; and it is the cord of the genitourinary tract between the white membrane which we have said, and not this but rather a tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitourinary tract, so that it pours out this material into those parts, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow or impact made on the genitourinary tract.
And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or is blackish-feculent, or white and watery, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is rounded and declining a little towards length in such a figure as that of a urethra, and appears the genitourinary tract, because the moisture contains all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is rounded with a part of the urethra and people estimate that it is another urethra.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitourinary tract and the white membrane, then you cut below the center.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you test the color of the moisture in the abscess with a thread which is preceded by its form; and according to what it appears in the vestige of the thread, judge from that what it is destined for.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be bloodletting if this is possible for you, and sometimes fill his body.
And then it should be elevated above the patient's back on some cause for a little while, and paused below with many cloths.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the attendant to follow on the right side of him, which will extend his hand to one of two sides to the cord of the genitourinary tract and to the part of the womb.
And then take a spatula and divide the cord of the genitourinary tract from the middle location to the length, just above the pubic arch.
And be made the section according to right and left evenly distant from the line that you should make on the skin of the genitourinary tract, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
And cut out that, and observe, and be careful not to insert it; and your excoriation with which you cut out by part below as if suspended on the urethra more and subtlety examine the excoriation according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the white membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the white membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitourinary tract comprehending, and insert the white membrane in that manner which is possible for you. And insert that with its totality or in pieces, and more subtly the left side, for if you do not thoroughly examine the insertion of it, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if the urethra proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white membrane, return back to it, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitourinary tract with suturing, and then cure that just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the urethra corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which are sore from the suspensory ligament, and extract the urethra, and then cure that with what we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you did with the other equally; and if it seems to be one operation, then you do it.
And then you should clean the blood, and enter into the sections the lanolin submerged in oil or rose-colored oil; and pause outside another lanolin which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitourinary tracts and the womb; and pause above cloths doubled and poultices, and bind them together with a ligament according to this form:
and then be pressed two cloths and be filled with lanolin kneaded according to this semblance; and be made the extremities with which it is necessary to bind with cotton or wet wool, and be attached with a strap in the waistband of the drawers, and one of the extremities takes from the tail to the thigh, and the second takes from the front of the pubic arch to the other side, and two extremities over two clefts below and two others over two angles, and all constriction be adjusted in the waistband of the drawers.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauterizer in place of sectioning with iron; and it is that you take a cauterizer cutlery subtle and insert it into the cord of the genitourinary tract, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white membrane containing the water is uncovered, and then you take the cauterizer according to this form: And it is gathered in Greek letter.
And then pierce the white membrane, and ignite until all the moisture is exhausted.
And then extend the white membrane with hooks, and excoriate with hooks, and excoriate with a subtle cauterizer ignited; and insert that according to what is possible for you until it radiates all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the urethra.
And you know that this operation is more safe and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
But if there is contradiction between abscess, sectioning or cauterization, or the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure what causes trouble to you in this way, with treatment which is suitable for him according to what is said.
But if the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what we have recommended above; and it is when you are certain of this, by means of what we have said about significations, that that hernia is watery.
Now it is necessary that you make the patient sit on some high stool, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And be the opening wide enough to drain all the water.
And then pause on the place cotton and bind that and leave it, in order that the remaining water may drain. And then cure that until the wound is healed.
But if contrariety is to the drainage of water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason that the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound causes contrariety and prevents the efflux of water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opposite side of the wound a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and is accumulated for about 6 months or a little more; and when it is accumulated, then be pierced according to this manner, so that the patient will thus pass through his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Of Sectioning on a Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
You know that in the sectioning of this hernia there is fear of losing one's life through great danger; therefore, to me it appears to be the dismissal of him and being saved by a better way.
And you are remembering the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses are formed in the bodies of those whose genitalia are composed and it is done so for many reasons: or by acute and sharp superfluity which is poured into the genitalia, or by impact.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And very rarely is it abscessed, the color of which is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it is caused by obstruction of the vessels, and by inflation of those things so that the memory of it is perceived, or by inflation of veins.
But this which is due to obstruction of the vessels is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with those things said; and it does not need that it be touched.
But this which is caused by inflation of the vein is not dispersed from him due to any cause of compression with those things.
And it is possible that on this species a section be made and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the cord of the genitourinary tract, and then stretch the urethra to the upper parts, and extract that from the white membrane, and free the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them together, and insert the suspensory ligament more than you deliver that from all part of the parts of the urethra.
Therefore, if the urethra is already consolidated in those fleshly parts, then it is necessary that you extract the urethra and insert that.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the white membrane or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and insert that by rounded insertion.
But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of him, and extract the urethra just as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose-colored oil and vinegar; and then cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the Cure of a Hernia that is of the Womb.
The womb is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a bud in softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the cure of this disease, fear is preceded by remembrance of it.
However, it is necessary that we say operation in that according to what was done by the first ones.
And I say that it is necessary to make the patient sit on a high stool; and then take hold of the suspensory ligament of the testicles at the lower parts; and then insert the cord of the genitourinary tract with those things said, into the vessels which are proved to be in the membrane; and have another minister than you, and extend it by extension vehement.
And then insert with a spatula, sharp and thin, a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
And then excoriate from all parts just as we have said in the extraction of the vessels which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first of the places where the womb is located, and tie it again on the other side of them. And then insert those in the middle location by right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated with the fetid and corrupted moistures.
And then cure the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you want to be generated by so that the vessels which nourish one of two genitalia, because it is not bad for that.
But if the womb is in all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this means are joined to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the insertion of the vessels, and that they are atrophied, or that they become joined by so that they are not suitable for those.
Chapter LXV.
Of the Cure of an Intestinal Hernia.
The advent of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the gut extended on the belly of one side of the abdomen, so that the intestines bursting forth from that rupture fall into some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the gut or of excess from him, and it occurs in these two species due to many causes: or percussion, or by force, or by shouting, or by elevation of some great cause, or by similarities.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the gut, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess engendered in such a way that the gut compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to section of the gut, because at first it causes a sudden and vehement pain; and it is an abscess which appears differently from the beginning, with the cord apparently provided, and this is because of efflux of the intestine, and the body of him into the parts outside of the gut.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine, and it is called this intestinal hernia "cirbel".
And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it runs into the intestine fissure, and there it is held, and it is there a great peril for the patient, and sometimes it causes a wicked and greater pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of these species of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the caustic in that.
And the manner of the operation for this is that you command the patient to pull out the intestine with his own hand into the parts outside of his conquered territory if he obeys the returnment, and then it should be inserted over his thigh between your thighs, and lift up the legs of him.
And then straighten the cord which cuts off the cord of the testicles at the upper parts, and insert the cord of the testicles all along; and then place in two lips of the section hooks according to what is needed to open up the section with them.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget about that from which the urethra is cut off.
And then excise those membranes which are below the cord of the testicles, until the white hard membrane is uncovered from each part.
And then you insert the thread said in this that cuts off the testicle, which is between the white membrane and the one below it, which is below the cord of the urethra, and between the second membrane, and absolve with that adherence that is behind the urethra.
And then take the thread of the testicles and insert it into the parts outside, and with that extend the white membrane on both sides with your left hand, and lift up the urethra with the membrane to the point of the section; and command the minister to stretch the urethra upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
And search for those things said which will not be any cause of the intestine being enveloped in the white hard membrane. But if you find some cause from him, then you take that and tie it to the belly below.
And then insert into the part below the cord of the testicles, through a section from which blood and pus flow, just as we have recounted in that which we have said.
And then administer lanolin immersed in oil, and pause on the wound; and administer the thread which we have recounted (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, which we have said should be inserted at the beginning to prevent bleeding, for many times those things occur) and leave the thread until it falls by itself.
But if the bleeding is delayed, then take cold water and wrap it around, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the wound with another cure for wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Of a Hernia of Ventosity.
In this hernia, there is no one who has been bold enough to undertake its cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made just as we have recounted in the hernia which is with vinegar; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section over there with ease of him; and then cut off in the middle location around the abscess with this which obstructs it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the Disproportion which is made in the Abdominals.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the abdominals just as we have said, and it protrudes the location.
And they do not nourish the genitalia with any cause of the intestines to the genitalia; and if they do, it is little; and it returns again in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is a fissure formed in the membrane until it descends into the membrane; and this occurs because of the extension of the membrane which is in the abdominals just as we have said, which cause is that the membrane is stretched, and then it becomes soft and the location abscesses and protrudes.
And the cure of this is with a cauterization just as we have previously recounted.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your thighs, and then cut off the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding through a section by latitude, according to the quantity of three days.
And then stretch the white membrane that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
And then take the ray and pause it on the protruding location of the membrane, and press it against the navel of the belly.
And then cut the two protruding locations on the extremity of the ray of the membrane, and tie them together with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the membrane entirely, nor extend the urethra, nor any other cause as you would have it be known in the cure of an intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, cleanse that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the membrane is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, for it is more conducive to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
Of the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it becomes fatigued from this.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is treating this to make the patient lie on his back between your thighs, and insert all the softened cord which is placed over the natural cord; and then tie two lips with a suture.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord in three or four incisions, and with a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then cure through the cure of other wounds, until it is healed and the threads fall.
Chapter LXIX.
Of Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but because it was commanded to me that I remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary for the remembrance of it except by two ways, one of which is because this is in the science of a doctor when he is interrogated about it, knowing the cure for which it occurs; and the other way is that we have many times needed castration of other animals for our livestock purposes through these, just as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by emasculation, or by incision at the section.
But in that which is done by emasculation, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie down in cold water until its genitalia are softened and relaxed and hang loose. And then take those with your hand, into which they are resolved and do not appear to leave the touching.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders, and cut on each urethra with one section until two urethras process.
And then cut those as much as you will have excised. And do not leave any cause on the membrane of the cord, except for the subtle cord which is above the veins.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by emasculation, because emasculation leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
Of the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that space which is between the cord of testicles, in that place where there are two testicles, resembling a female form with breasts.
And sometimes from that one urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women, there is another species: and it is that the woman's vulva on the pubis is just like two male testicles, a little of everything, at the front part, just like the male perineum and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women. And it is that you must cut off those adjusted flesh parts until the impression of that is gone, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine flows that is in the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
Of Lentiwing and Eminence of Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Lentiwing is very little adjusted over natural causes, until it is stretched and made to be a regular habit; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and pervades unto coition.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to take the excess of lentiwing with your hand or with a tool and cut it off.
And do not stop cutting until you reach the root of the reason, for fear that excessive bleeding may ensue.
And then cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific part of the mare until it fills it, and very little is extracted to the front parts according to the likeness of a cock (and for this reason I will call this bad birth disease); therefore, it is necessary that we cut it off just like we cut off lentiwing, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the Cure of Alrication.
Alrication is when the woman's vulva is not perforated, or is only slightly breached. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not adjusted or by subtle cord or thickening.
And it is caused either in the front of the mare, or in the sides of it, or in the uppermost part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and very much prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is made by observation of the meter, if the opacity is apparent, it is taken as a sign; but if it is not apparent, then you should search for it with the said threads or with the ray.
But if the opacity is due to subtle cord, and it is attached to both lips, then you should cut and tear it.
And it is that you pause on the two lips of flesh, and then pause the said threads indicating the signs of both masses at once.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then stretch both lips with force until that subtle cord is broken and the opacity is opened.
And then take lanolin and mix it with oil and pause that on the location, and lie down at home for a day so that the cut location is not consolidated.
But if the cord is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula or with mirta wood.
But if the opacity is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with a tool and cut it off.
And use those medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as hakea, and dragon's blood, and enesis, adjusted with hen's egg white.
And then administer a broad leaden cannula to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated slightly.
And keep that in place for several days and administer lukewarm water.
And then be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and it is necessary that you cut off according to this manner. But if it is due to foul abscesses, then there should be no contrariness with iron in any manner against the foul abscesses that are in the mare.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Botch that occurs in the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are a great affliction of the orifices of many veins until those vessels corrode continuously and with time old hemorrhoids and their symptoms become worse.
And I have said in the division of those species and their signs, and I will say which ones receive cure and which ones do not.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and their symptoms when they are in the front part of the mare and do not appear with sensation, then in those there is no cure by iron.
But those which are in the orifice of the mare and show sensation, are those that can be cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and then stretch her tail with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut off those things with razors.
And then powder on those the flows of blood from one of the cutting powders without biting, just like acaesis and similar to those.
And then warm her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the blood flows persistently, then make that person sit in a decoction of senna and scorzonera and guaiacum and similar herbs.
And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is stopped, it's good; and if not, make her adhere to two poultices, and on the nipples without scarification.
And then take lanolin and immerse that in the juice of colicandra or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and then cure the location with a poultice until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of the Perforation of Accidental Fistula in the Mare.
Many species of accidental abscesses occur in the mare, such as gangrene and lapidated abscess, ulcers, adhubilation, eruptive menopause, hemorrhoidal fistula, rugarius, and others. And I have already said these diseases and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division.
And it is necessary that you say in this treatise about the cauterized abscess which occurs in the mare when it is one of the abscesses that brings forth health, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the abscess in its initial stage is sharp with percussion and flux and fever, and if it blisters and if there is sensation on it, then do not cut open the abscess with perforation, but cure it with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident subsides.
And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie down on a couch with two cushions; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part most distant from the belly, and her legs be expanded, and pause her arms behind her nails, and bind each one with a string to water.
And then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the mare is opened, the shape of which will come in those causes that are about to be done.
And then it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you make it so that the ray of the front part of the mare of the woman goes into the instrument, and what enters the instrument from the mare does not go beyond the front part of the mare and does not hurt the patient. But if the instrument is greater than the front part of the mare, then it is necessary that you powder on the texture of the front part of the mare so that it prohibits the entrance of any instrument into the front part of the mare.
And then it is necessary that you powder the pivot which runs in the instrument on the right side and above, and that the minister hold the instrument and turn the pivot until the orifice of the mare is opened.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is warm and moist, then it is necessary that you cut off what is above the head of it with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil which has some purifying properties; and pause the pressure in the section of the front part of the mare.
And then pause before the mare and on the pentimento lanolin submerged in water which has been boiled with mallows.
And then be cured after two days with an ointment which corresponds to the water until it is healed.
And sometimes the mare is washed and the wound with this mixture that is clarified with water and honey, and then with water in which the root of lily or of Aristolochia longa has been boiled, and then returns to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the mare with pus, then it is necessary that you are prohibited from cutting into it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner they should be medicated when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should know at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by signs from it, and that when you see the woman expel the afterbirth with ease and desire to smell the air, and on top of that is relaxed due to what is coming out of her part, and hasten the descent of the embryo, then you should know that this part is according to natural figure, and is the descent of it onto its head, and the second stage is with that or suspended or pendulous from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, since you see those signs, it is necessary that the belly of her be compressed so that the embryo descends slightly when they descend onto its head, and then comes out the second stage, and is cleaned of those superfluidities with good cleansing.
But that which is another this part is unnatural and not feasible, for when the embryo is descended onto its feet and her body is descended before her head and her feet, and one hand or at her foot .i., or is descended the head of her and one hand or at her belly, and very much is turned towards her back, and similar to the figures that are not feasible.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to keep herself from error and deception.
And you show all the figure of those, and what engineer is in them so that it may be signified by this and has stood on this.
When the fetus is placed on its head by natural excretion, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it is already weakened, then make her sit down or lie down with ease, and evaporate the vulva of her with fenugreek coitus and with warm oil.
And then insert the finger of the midwife between her said spatula and crevice with that the second stage, or cut it off at its own nail until the moisture flows forth which is in her. And press the belly of the woman until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be clarified with pellitory mucilage and fenugreek mucilage with vinegar.
And then command it to her, and command the clarification that be compressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and tie her mouth and nose of her for one hour, because the fetus will soon forget.
And if the two membranes of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with small pieces of facilitation little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a couch and lift her feet up, and then conceive the couch on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall with the concussion.
And if the membranes are not turned back and the fetus dies, then cut them open and extract the placenta of the fetus or tie the body to her hand with cloth and extract it with equality, because that will soon be forgotten.
When the fetus is placed on its feet, then it is necessary that you encourage those in place, and then turn the small fetus around, and then make it equal to the previous one, and then take one foot of her and stretch them out little by little.
But when they are placed into the legs, then you command her to push, and make her sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until it pauses according to natural figure, because that will soon be forgotten with easier descent.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recounted, then take the mucilage of althea and dissolved gum, and strike it well in the mortar for good striking, and then line it up with water the vulva of the woman, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that to cease in hot water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when times that the afterbirth of her are relaxed, then make her sub-fumigation with myrtle and sub-pause it to her. And when the sub-fumigation lasts for an hour, then make her sit down on a couch, and make her sneeze and stretch out her mouth, and lift it away from her, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
Descent of the fetus laterally pending one of its membranes. Let it be reduced by the hand of her, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike the legs of her with strong concussion, and then administer the remedies which you have recounted to us in mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit down on a couch, and then study the reduction of the arm, and equalize the fetus according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Descent of the fetus onto the back, with its membranes expanded and the woman's face to her right side. It is necessary that the midwife has the hand of the fetus and then turns it little by little, and makes it equal with facility.
And when it is equalized and the time comes, then pause over the vulva of her with what we have recounted of oil and mucilages.
And then command her to push little by little, and when you have finished that, make her sit down on a couch and command her to lean over the right side, and then command her to compress; and make her sneeze with conditions. Exit of the prepared fetus onto the side.
When it comes out of the mother's horror according to this manner, consider, and then you cut open the second stage with your finger until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over her face and back, then you cut open that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus into the afterbirth until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it will soon be forgotten with easier descent, if God so wills.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that sometimes twins are born, and sometimes not even three or four, but this is strange and does not come about naturally. But there are causes that are against nature, and they do not live.
And with these [twins], whether they are multiple or single, one second stage, and they are separated by the navel, distinguish them into individual ligaments in each of those. And sometimes they are forgotten like this, as if it were just one fetus descending naturally easier, and sometimes they are seen like this, not feasible like we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat them like we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does that which makes for facility and subtlety, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all figures, as it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and those that are aborted.
Some women are found to be fertile with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten children, and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman has given birth to six and another to ten in total, which was caused by the measurement of the wise ones.
And all this is necessary in the science of the midwife, because it comes to that which seems like a small matter to her, and therefore pause in that with what is needed.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled outside, and you are forced to use an operation with hand, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents whereby loss of life is feared upon her.
Then it is necessary that the woman be laid down on her back on her shoulders, and her head inclined downwards and her legs elevated.
And the minister hold that in two parts or be tied on her back so that her body does not extend excessively during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oil, and with mucilage of althea and fenugreek and seed of lily.
And then the midwife puts her hand on the mother's abdomen with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand with facility into the mother, and then searches for the exact place where the fingers should be inserted into the fetus.
And finds the convenient place in this: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and then you make your fingers enter into one of these places: into the ears, or into the back, or into the mouth, or into the palate, or under the beard, or into the furrow, or into the proper places of the ribs, or into the hypochondria.
But if the descent is onto her feet, then in the pterygium or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to have the finger of her right hand, and pause the curvature of her in that place which is between the fingers of her left hand, and insert the hand with facility and make the finger enter into one of those places which we have said, until it reaches the cause of childbirth.
And then pause and make another finger or the third if necessary, in order to be an equal attraction, and not an extension according to its straightness alone.
And thus it is good at all parts, because the descent of her will be alleviated as it is done in denture by the eradication of the fetus.
And thus it is necessary in her that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if some part of her is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint certain fingers with oil and insert those skillfully and revolve with what is retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers should be pushed into a location that is higher up; and make it so until the entire fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is stuck in front of the other and it is not possible to reduce that by the constriction of her, then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all is forgotten, and cut it open either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
And thus it is necessary to do the same in the other hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or if constriction occurs during delivery, or if water is adjusted in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a spatula with spines and cut open the head and extract the water, or use an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
And similarly do if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary to cut open that with an instrument called "algematu", or take it with an "alundat" as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and constricted at the furrow, then it is necessary to cut open into where the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated nor follows the descent, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
And if the afterbirth is apostematous or is in a watery state, then it is necessary to perforate that until the humidity which is in it runs out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is slight.
But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then it is necessary to extract that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and cut open the belly and feet until the water that is in them runs out.
But if the other members are obstructed and the head turns back, then enter the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then enter the right hand into the prepuce of the lute, and seek out that head, and attract it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers and attract her to them.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted due to apostema which happens to one, then it is not necessary to trouble about it; before all, it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid and fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible it is, be punctured: and administer what we have said about a living fetus.
And if this is not possible, then cut into the membranes and extract it.
And it is necessary that no cause remains behind in the second stage.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for apostemas which occur in the mother.
And if bleeding occurs, then let it flow into stiptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and then on that same spot another pregnancy had been undertaken, and then the dead fetus is the other. It happened to one that a long time ago an apostema occurred in her navel; and it swelled up until it became a tumor, and began to discharge pus.
And you were called upon to cure her, and treated her for a long time, but the wound was not consolidated.
Then you applied to her some poultices of strong attraction, and extracted from her a bone, and then after a few days, another bone was extracted; and you were very astonished, because in the belly there was no bone.
And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then you cleansed the wound and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her own milk deposits, and already living in such a way for a long time, bore from it a small amount of pus.
And you did not think it strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to what the physician artist administers with his hand for healing.
On the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
The form of a vice-like shape in which the mother is opened up:
This is the form of strengthener in which are equalized the ligaments, at which equalization are two vices on two extremities of two feet. However, this vice should be more subtle and made of ebony or boxwood.
And the width of each stick should be two fingers and the edge of each one a single finger; and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two sticks are two adjustments of those same sticks which are already fixed, from which the length is slightly less than one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you revolve the two prescribed vices.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps. However, at the end of it are two additions like times, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you make the woman sit down on her back, and open what is between the thighs of hers. And then place your hand with the instrument as you would with forceps, equalizing according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until it makes what you want.
The form of vice which they called in the olden days:
Form of impulse with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of amputation with which the large head is cut off.
And it is assembled to forceps with which there are teeth at the end, like times, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, with which there are teeth like the teeth of a saw that is inserted and cut. Form of little amputation:
Form of finger having a spine:
Form of finger having two spines:
Form of spatula having two handles with which the head is cut off:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when even more species of that and they are prepared by the artisans, as soon as it is easier to their operation and more abundant for humans in its quantity.
And you must not neglect any of those instruments whatsoever, since the necessity of them is not excusable.
On the extraction of the placenta.
When the placenta is retained after delivery, then you must command the patient to strain their bladder and appropriate make that stornudar with conditions, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of it and on the nostrils of it, and if by so it has been extracted, good is.
And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce a hole in the cover and pause on that herb which opens up the mouth of the mother, such as calamus and rue and anise and camomile and Arabic squill and cinnamon. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that on the fire.
And then put a reed cane into the mouth of the mother, and keep it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
And then make that stornudar as we have said, and the placenta will be extracted with speed.
But if this cure does not work and the placenta remains, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or a mucilage of althea, and then insert that into the womb and seek out the placenta, and when you have found it, take it and extract it little by little. But if it is annexed to the back of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the placenta, extract it little by little following the natural order so that the mother does not faint from excessive attraction. Before all, it is necessary to be well-established on both right and left sides with facility.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with straining and medication by the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not extracted with all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful that you do not force it on her in iteration of abstraction, but rather ensure that what has come out from her to the mouth of the mother lies on the back of the woman, and then cover it with a cloth and tetrafarmacal; for that will make it rot away after some days and be dissolved and extracted.
But when it rots away, it rises to bad humor in the head and stomach, and this leads to the patient's illness; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered accordingly.
But some of the Ancients have already tried sub-fumigation with nutmeg and dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for retention of menstruation and placenta:
It is made of birch or iron.
And it is paused with the subtle extremity in the womb and the broad extremity on the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused above the arms of the fire.
And keep that in until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another.
On the cure of the child's unperforated navel.
Many children are born without navels, and their bellies are not perforated, which are now covered with a subtle and opaque membrane. Then have the midwife pierce that membrane with her finger, and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the lacrimal gland.
And then apply a poultice on that wound with wool saturated in wine and oil, and then cure it with a cloth until it is healed.
But if you fear that it may be blocked, then insert a reed into the wound for many days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
And already occurs obstruction of the navel due to consolidation of the wound or apostema; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut out, and then cure it with the water we have said about the cure and lead.
On the cure of the fistulas that are left behind.
The fistulas that remain after the birth, lower down near the navel and thicker ones which are left near the outside of the navel or in the space of one side.
And it is a single fistula or multiple.
And when this nodule is aged and comes forth with white or subtle pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And those that are penetrating are known by what comes out of them through the egress and windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and then a great deal of blood is discharged from those.
And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space and enter the bladder, and enter the urethra of the penis; and some of those that penetrate enter the junction of the back and enter the notch of the coccyx.
And it is known by what comes out of a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula that you put your finger in the navel and then gently probe with a subtle instrument made of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no blockage.
But if there is blockage in that, then insert a subtle instrument made of lead or the hide of a horse into it until you feel the instrument or the hide at the navel.
And if you don't feel that at all or there is no discharge of any kind, whether blood, pus, or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra of the penis, then know that its significance is discharged through urine and prohibition of further discharge at this point so that the location may be consolidated with medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the back or bone and causing pain in the circuit, then know that its signification is that the probe enters here if there is no blockage into the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the side; and that from there is discharge always; and that it is not good in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with a cloth.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of these is the labor and patience of skilled physicians on which they are fixed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not aged, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I have recommended to you, and what has already been proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your legs over their own thighs and lifts up their knees to theirs, so that their backs are inclined towards their belly; and then insert a lead probe or one made of steel if there is blockage in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe pierces.
And if that feels pain around the navel, then have you insert your finger into the navel.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already been discovered to be penetrating, or on the other hand you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble yourself with it, as we have said.
But others will say that some are cured in certain men's hands.
And the medicine by which one hopes for a good outcome in that is that you apply a subtle cauterizing fire according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before, and then insert that ignited substance into the fistula until it reaches around the navel; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted fleshy folds are adapted, which resemble the quill of an eagle.
And then cure that with wraps of cloth in butter until all those fleshy folds are softened and consolidated, and if it is healed, good is; but if not, then know that it will not be cured in any time through another cure.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into that which is in the navel, but instead between that and the probe which is a layer of flesh or membrane, and sometimes the fistula opens up to the surface of the codenna, then dry up the codenna from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe is, and through the probe is liberated and cleansed.
And then clean those fleshy folds which are gathered like the quill of an eagle and do not remain any cause.
But if there is bleeding when you are cleaning those fleshy folds, then take the milk which is and of the pus's easier instrument, cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted fleshy folds, and abscission of blood excessive from humidity.
And then cure that with wraps of cloth or coarse thread wrapped around the wound until it becomes firm and dry, and then apply a poultice made from hard flesh which generates and consolidates.
And such medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when that has been restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has pierced into the navel of the abdomen and is elongated from its surface to the body, then insert your finger into the navel and ask about it.
And therefore if you find the probe and it is between you and her, and it is suddenly of membrane or flesh, and it is inclined towards penetration, then there is no operation in that place except according to the way of faith and hope.
The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry up the wound until you achieve the conquest of the area so that it becomes possible for you to insert the instruments and the proper cure; and not proceed with the drying process so that the lacrimal gland contained in the navel is not disturbed, and what happens is according to the patient's will; and then apply the remedy as we have said, for it is likely that the wound will be healed; or to lengthen the membrane and remove the pus that has accumulated in the area, as we have said, with a sharp instrument or another instrument of acute extremity, and then clean those fleshy folds which are in the section where you can see the pericrustation; and then make an effort to restore the entire wound through drying, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on one side of the navel, and it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the navel around the surface of the body with the codenna and on the margin of the navel, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle prepared to pierce through according to this form:
and insert into that faithful wrap of five or seven, and then insert the probe wrapped in it into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of the area.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the navel, then you take out the thread from that hole and insert your finger into the navel; and pull out the extremity of the thread and adjust both ends together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when more often you introduce the thread into the flesh, strengthen it until those fleshy folds which are between the two ends of the thread are separated.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but not into the navel, for it is not for you to do so that you do not disturb the lacrimal gland; and then make it so that it is healed.
The shape of the spatulum with which the fistula is pierced: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that you do not disturb what is not necessary, just as sometimes happens.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the insertion of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, because either they are between the navel resembling as if they were of charcoal, or those that are like a bunch of grapes. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them always and is one, and many, and outside the navel, and at its extremities.
But those that are outside the navel are according to the months of little humidity, from which a yellowish water or a small amount of blood flows with continuous bleeding, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is outside the navel is that you command the patient to settle and to evacuate into the navel, so that it may be cleansed and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold of them and suspend with hooks or what you have at your finger's end, and then insert those into the very roots.
But if the hooks are not taken hold of in those due to their humidity and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of cord or with woolen flax, and pull out those with your fingers, and then insert those and sprinkle some powders that are suitable for cauterization over them, so that they may be adapted to the area; or cauterize those as is described in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other remedy until they are healed.
And if the navel does not obey evacuation, then bind the patient with a binding that has a small biting point, and wash it with water from the navel and it will obey evacuation slightly when the patient is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the navel, then the cause of theirs is slight, and it is that you take them with your finger or with hooks, and insert them, and then cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
And the one who will perform the suturing, must minister suturing to them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert it into an needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that thread penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread in the part farthest from the needle, and so laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then remove the needle and thread.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and not cauterize it, so that the excess blood will flow from that one.
And then pause over the navel, wrapping it with cloth soaked in red oil or cerote; and pause that on the navel and command the patient to rest. And then leave it alone until it is closed; and when it is closed, cure those with herbs or another remedy until they are healed.
And when they are ancient and not good with that medicine, then you must take those away with the point of a spatula or your finger until they are made moist and the discharge above is hosted, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must take those away with reason more vehement than the first time until much blood flows and they are excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids are the key, and not just notes around according to the color of the skin resembling a head of clover, and it is made in all the body and most especially in the parts left behind the weights and the said ones, and entwined by those pains you will know the meaning.
And then it is necessary to be inserted into the circuit of the key, and to be held with forceps or hooks, and to be eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is described in its own chapter.
But in truth, warts are small, hard, and round bumps on the surface of the body, and many times they appear on the hands of children.
And the cure for it is that you stretch and insert it, or that you strengthen it with a thread or skin until it closes. And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But a mole is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body that appears like a bite from a worm, and it is made around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a needle from an eagle or a vulture, and it should be strong, and pause it on the mole until it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the needle until you insert what is in the circuit of the mole, and pause it in the flesh of the skin, and that eradiques the mole from its root.
And if you wish, make it with a needle of iron or steel according to this form:
So the upper part of the needle is pulled out with subtlety, softly (it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that above it the skin's learning is abolished and the revolution of that one.
And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization.
The Form of the Instruments Which Are Administered to Give Binding.
Some times it is made binding of silver or lead or melted iron or malletted; and some times it is made from those small and large instruments according to those with which they are administered, for that which is administered in the care of small children should be small; and as for those whose behinds are freckled or dolorous, their bindings should be small.
The Form of Great Binding and Little.
The head of the needle above, in which the pouch is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is tied, just as sometimes.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the navel, should be soft (it is not opened) like a lion's mouth, going back to subtlety; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and its width should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker than small.
And the pouch should be in which medicines of vescera of beast or of wool of sheep are placed, and the root of it is one palm.
And it should be pierced with many small holes just as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes is the thickness of that.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of pure linen, which is made of ten threads, or surround them with it; and adjust the pouch to that point; and when the pouch is placed in it, be stretched in the head of the binding between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and then bind each hole: But the quality of binding at that time is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be laid on their back, and raise their knees up high and pause above that point one foot over which men or a lance is placed; and then bring the extremity of the cauteri with oil or album of hou or mucilage of fenugrec or similar things; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and then take the pouch and express all that is in the binding into the bedpan; and then remove the binding and the patient will put their knees to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to come out, keep it as long as possible; and if they sleep with that for all of one night, it is more likely to bring about a good outcome.
But if you bind that in the diseases of flux and evacuation of stool, then you must iterate the cauteri until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or apostemats in the navel, then you must use a binding that is gentle and soft, like those with which children are bound.
The Cure of Plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues that which pertains to the free [person], and I say thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to how they are made and according to the place where one falls ill.
And the causes by which most plagues are made are just as follows: corruption of air, or incision with a sword or dagger, or striking with a lance, or hitting with a club, or arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are like this: plague which is on the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the cure for some plagues by which that ratio and rule will apply to other plagues.
And I begin with the plagues of the head simple, for the recollection of the compound will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to corruption of air or similar cause, and the patient has already suffered great pain and there is danger of apostema developing, then you should take care and immediately bleed the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some other cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood that comes out of the plague is little.
And it should be the bleeding from the opposite side of the affected part; and take care to keep the patient away from replenishment and from meat and heavy foods.
But if any cause prohibits [bleeding], then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And pause over the plague, if it becomes an apostema with caution, cut into the inflamed area with a razor or in wine that is sterilized.
But if it is certain that the abscess is cautions, then pause over the plague, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder which you recommended, only a little.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause over another ointment until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is due to incision of a sword and similar causes, and the lips are not adjusted because of pus, then adjust them with suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.
But if the plague has already been discovered in the bone and skin, and it is not retention of pus but only a small suspensori, then incise it and immediately cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to its original state, and command the patient to eat foods that are greasy: caps and forms like those, until they are composed.
And if you find putrefaction in the bone and it does not adhere to the surrounding tissue, then you must incise the entire area and cut it out, and immediately cure it.
But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not severed by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find that one which has not been cut, then you must incise it with a spatula or ligate it; and if necessity demands, do what we have said earlier, namely, cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in this way you should powderize over those with this powder, because it will consolidate before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of hellebore, one part; blood of dragon, two parts; and no-extinct cause, three parts. Grind all together well and finely, and fill the plague with it, and constrain it with good constriction until it adheres well to that place, and coagulate it with the blood.
And appropriate tightly that which is above with powder and loosen it a little, and do not remove it until it is in such a state that it is not apostemated, for the medicine is not absorbed by it until it is healed.
And sometimes this alone causes trouble when you are not present with oil of hellebore and blood of dragon.
And already this same operation is done on great plagues when it is necessary to pause over those and to tighten them, and on recent plagues with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then it is not intended to place this powder on them, but rather cure those with what we have said, by pausing over them with certain ointments or by placing powder of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they produce pus; and immediately cure those with the other medication until they are healed.
But if there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you should extract that with gentle gestures.
And I shall direct the cure for fractures of the head in what is necessary.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then it is not different from it [the previous topic] in terms of medication, and between the plague of the head when simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are already cut or an artery is involved, then if it is a nerve, do not intervene in it, but rather avoid any cure that might cause vehement stiptication, just as you would with ziniar and zegi which is similar to vetriol and resembles them, so as not to harm the nerves and contract that one. And do not pause over the plague any cause that is too fleeting, because the substance of the nerves is fleeting and their continuation is with the brain, which is the most noble of all the members.
And if that is cured with light medicines, just as it is washed with double water, some having been infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with double water and the other parts mincing according to this manner, and ointments moist.
But if the plague is great, then you should administer sutures, or compress the lips of it, and immediately cure that with powder until it is healed.
But if the plague is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the pus, then you should perforate that at the most depressed location.
But if in the plague an artery has already been cut and bleeding occurs, then you should separate or dry it, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of them have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the lips of the spine with a suture over the canal of the neck and do not touch it; before that, equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and immediately strengthen it with decent traction, and loosen it for several days; and immediately cure it with ointments in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
But if the plague has made a fracture in the bone, then you should pound it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can from them; and what is not apparelled, leave it until the plague subsides, and be separated and the excrescence from it be alleviated.
And if the plague is recent, then powderize over it the powder which I have recommended. But if the plague has created a fistula, then cure it with that which will come to mind in the next chapter.
If it is a lance or cotelette percussion and you penetrate to the depth of the wound, then consider more whether there is ventosity from the plague when the patient is emaciated; know that the plague is mortal.
And if there is no depth in it and the plague is recent with its own blood, then you should pause on it for the first hour with powder, and not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and does not return to the heart and cause the patient's death, but rather pause on it with an attractive ointment, and remove it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not present, then you should pause in the orifice of the plague a cuticle so that it sucks out what flows from the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that the liquid that is in it becomes adjusted.
But if the plague has passed three days or more and there is no spasme nor tremor of heart nor constriction of breath, and times other good dispositions of it, then you should know that the plague is saved; and then cure it with poultices and with the other medication until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you should know that a fistula has been made; cure therefore that according to the next chapter.
And if the plague is due to incision with a sword or cotelette, and it is simple in the superficial layer of the foot or hand, then you should cure it with that which precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has made a fracture in the bone, and you have already cut through it, then you should twist the plague and pull out those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then you should leave them alone until the plague subsides, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
And for the other plagues that occur in the other members, the judgment on treatment is the judgment of what we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great or small or mid-sized.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it becomes clear that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to introduce them back into their place as soon as possible, because they swell and are engrossed, making the instrument of it difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is mid-sized, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the bowels, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
And know that the suturing of the belly is according to four manners, but two suture methods are common which occur in the suture of other plagues of the chest.
And two other suture methods proper to communicate with the other plagues, but however they are more proper in the suturing of the belly.
And I recommend to you all exposition and declaration.
So I say that when the plague is small and some cause from the belly by that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has become inflamed by the coldness of the air.
And so when this is the case, then it is necessary that you scrape that area and submerge a sponge or wet cloth in hot water, or that you take it out of the bath and apply cyperum, spic, and embrocate to that area until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes I have seen that this [cyperum, spic, and embrocate] has had a stimulating effect in the area where there is inflammation, and it is better than just water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the belly with water in which there are high and bad qualities, because through this the instrument of it is alleviated with little cause.
But if the instrument of it resists this cure, then you should divide the disruption into small pieces with an instrument on which there are incised engravings.
And the first cure is better when it is proper and not secundary, and there is no occasion to cut unnecessarily near necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, it is necessary that its form be such:
The one part of it is twisted and sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the extremity is subtle, and not be as fine as a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
And therefore when the plague is amplified and protrudes outside the belly, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible above it, because better it is.
But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and pause their knees higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you pause the head and feet higher than the remaining parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and consideration at all times so that the part where the plague is located is higher than the other.
And similarly, it is necessary to administer this in great plagues and in mid-sized plagues.
And in small plagues, pause this which is at your preparation, and prepare to make the minister between your most skilled hands, which has the disruption all with its own hand and adjusts the lips of it, and prepares to uncover that from that which sees some cause for another suturing.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the abscess; and then leave the extremity of the disruption at the anular region, and pull the needle one time, or twice, depending on whether you are inserting a faithful thread into both extremities of the code, with two extremities of the ciphac that is left over from the partitions within, until it makes that penetrate that part; and you have already added two extremities of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, making four orders.
And then pull the thread double in the loop of the needle, and sometimes two parts together, and add the two lips and the abscess by decent addition; and leave the thickness of the digit and put another needle in it, and tie that to a thread like the first needle; and do not stop doing this until there is no more necessity with the needles until you have completed all the tension of the abscess.
And the needles are mid-sized between coarseness and subtlety, because the fine needles barely touch the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to manipulate in the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be mid-sized in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in two extremities of the code at once, so that the flesh is not barely touched and the plague is not exacerbated before its consolidation.
And the sutures should not be prolonged so that the plague is prevented from consolidation.
And appropriate to insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's rest while sleeping; and pause over the suture, spreading out the powders from all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles in this manner is more suitable for small plagues, because it can be done with one needle or two around those.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, in one pass, with a needle wrapped in thread, where there is subtlety and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle to that middle part from which it began, in order that the thread retires from the most superior part of the plague, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with threads that are stretched.
And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the digit less.
And this suture is known by men.
And with this suture, I cured the abscess which had been injured in a man's belly who had been wounded with a knife, and it was the disruption of the larger abscess of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the navel and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the belly had been opened for 24 hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and cured him, and then he lived for many years and is converted to his dispositions.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; and by a miracle, because you did not cure him with medicine, for it was in a place where no medicine was found or any remedy, but rather pause over the plague, cutting off two times a day and ablution frequent with water of honey until he was cured.
But I will tell two species of sutures that are proper, according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the code, and enter the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And then, when the needle enters the code and in that meets the lacertus according to rectitude and length of all the body, and leave the extremity of the ciphac in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the mihat.
And then, when you have made that penetrate, pause and make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the mihat from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make penetrate with that your penetration, which you make it penetrate in the ciphac at the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of you until all that penetrates.
And then, start on this side of the same way and sew that with the extremity that is from the ciphac to the other side, and take out the needle from the code which penetrated, and then reduce it in this code and sew the extremity of the ciphac which is on the other side to this extremity of the mirror; and take out that from the code which is part of you.
And do it once and another time, and do it once again close to the other time until you have sewn all that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a suture of skins in which you sew the flesh, so that you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the code, and then leave it another time until it is complete.
But the second proper species of suture which I call Gualia, and this is said to be from the womb of life and for life recounted, is that you sew according to semilitut with which certain medicines are sewn, in such a way that they add all parts to their corresponding part, as is convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one side and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of one side, and this is done according to what you have recounted.
You should place the needle in the extremity of the mirror, at your own end from the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that same one; and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn the needle back and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
And then turn those same ones around, and make them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part in two other extremities of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
And this manner of suture is better than the common lightweight suture, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the saying of Gualia.
And others will say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you insert in these [stitches] a thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle of what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who sew skin together.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of life (lu) is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
But the judgment of medicine regarding a plague is a judgment of other plagues.
The reason is that when you succeed in curing the recent plague with the patient's own blood before it has altered and reduced the swelling and sewed it up and adapted it decently, then pause over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that which certain medicines have done to you, until they make a hard crust and loosen the threads, and are consolidated ciphac and mirror; and thus cure it just as is the cure of other plagues, so that it may be healed.
But if you don't have the medicines present, then pause over that for now, since it begins to bear fruit, cut well, and exchange it two times a day, just as I taught you, until it is healed, because you won't need other medicine in many dispositions when plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will spread to the main members, then it is good that you submerge a lion's hair in quality tempered oil or in rosin oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the joints and leave it there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own swellings, because many times it seems to be developing, then anoint that with vi stiptic black tebe, and especially if the inflammation has spread to the swelling and is made to burst forth penetrating into the cavity of life.
And you know that what is in the thick swelling is of a more light healing than what is in the subtle swellings.
And it is of difficult healing because the swelling which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that settles in its entirety; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that one, and because of its proximity to the natural state of nerves.
But if the process of the plague is the fabric, and you succeed in getting it recent, then reduce it according to your own straightness with which you reduce swellings evenly.
But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then when you stretch that with a thread over the location that is degraded from life, in order that the flow of blood may come back, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And thus inscribe this that is another bond, and pause the two ends of the thread pending on the side opposite to the plague foro lu, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of life towards the settling of the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of plagues when they occur in the swelling.
When disruption occurs in the swelling and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in certain people, because of this, since you see one who was struck with plague in his own belly with a blow from a lance and had a plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made a fistula, and there was great effort and ventosity.
Therefore you pursued the cure of life even though it was not confirmed in its healing, but instead you continued to subtletize that until it is sanctified and the place is consolidated.
And you saw that the place was already consolidated, and then you came to the patient who had developed an evil illness on his own belly due to the accident of evil; and no one else could heal him through this evil accident and remained in his usual miserable state eating and drinking, and thus entered into a bath and was exercised in his own strength.
And some experienced ones will say that when a plague develops in the swelling, and it is small, then it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: and it is that you take figs of great size; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and pause one fig from those that have an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes hold on them and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of life, because it adheres and will not be dissolved.
And thus pause another fig close to the first one, and do not cease to make figures one after another according to the quantity of the entire plague.
And thus reduce the swelling and cover it with the plague; and remain those heads attached in the swelling until the swelling is healed; and no harm will come to anyone.
And it is possible that the swelling may be tied with a fine thread made from the swelling of an animal attached to life, since it is more in harmony; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of the swelling, and it is much denuded, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of life, wrapped, and then insert that thread into the holes and cover it with the swelling, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of suture with figs is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
But if the plague is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle swellings, because then it is not just subtlety, but rather a complete healing of life as a whole.
The treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every plague and apostema when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made an ulcer, and not consolidated and gives arm to the body all the time and is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we call it abscess.
And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulation made of fat, hard, white, with which there is no pain and in which there is a cavity just as it is in the pain of an owl; and therefore we call that abscess of rice, that is, pain.
And it is in some people's abscesses that it is watery, which gives arm; and very soon the moisture is discharged in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and it is little, and it is big, and it is subtle.
And I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the cure for them with medicines in the division.
And so it is necessary that you should know the cure for fistula, which is made by way of operation with my own hands.
And know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body, because there are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or ciphac, or swelling, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed by composition as if of the hand and foot; and from these it is that there are those that give proximity to the main member and similar things.
And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if it is some fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I have said, and you wait and hope for its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a risk with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the right path, and you will probe it with the instrument.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead, because lead is lightened by its own weight and curved in such a way that it follows the twists.
And if the fistula is filled with many horrors, it is not possible for you to signify anything about it by attempt.
Then block the opening with your own openings, because the moisture which you will use to block it will flow into the other openings and run from them.
And thus inquire with exquisite care, according to which manner it is possible for you to know whether here there are bones or nerves, and if the fistula's cavity is distant or close by, or if it is a fistula that has many openings and lies above this whole, in accordance with the sum of your strength, with your understanding, with which you understand the illness, and the invention of pain due to your compression on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents affecting the apostema.
And when you have stood on all those causes with steady vision, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a place of salt, distant from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
And now you will close the fistula according to what has been said above about its narration, and leave it in that filtration and corruption of flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh, or in the thread and similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of long distance and depth, and follows the right path, then you must inscribe it in the preon as much as possible, and accordingly cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and accordingly administer some enveloped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And then apply it to that with some repeated times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you must cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify this, then you must investigate it and close it according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit any cause related to a vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you must remove that which is corrupted until all corruption is purged out; and accordingly cure it with what encases it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and gives arm as it used to, then you must know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; and therefore you uncover over it secondarily and exquisitely make the reason of it and the purification of it with the utmost force, and accordingly restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, be well; and otherwise, you must know that that corruption is in the deep and distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and then to you it is not possible to do anything but leave it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to your ability to draw it in, then you must draw it in with subtle forceps which are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, then you must make the extraction of all those with exquisite care, and do not leave any cause for your strength to be weakened.
But if there is some cause of opposition from the fluids, and in their insertion you have no fear or error, then you must insert those ligaments or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your moment, then pause over the wound that is pressing on the wound itself, and leave it until what surrounds those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and be constricted by the section which you have inserted in your operation.
They had, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice of warm oil, or a poultice of Egyptian gentian, or one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments relax and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone like the one of the hip or the spine or similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it so much as to be considered, then you must remove that which is corrupted with scissors only at the back until that blackness and corruption is removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and all insert into the place where the corruption has taken hold, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you try to find a man in his cossy for whom you can pause that and example and assistant over your operation.
Find a young man of about xxx years old, to whom you will assign pain in his cossy, and the parts that are inside him are mauled by something outside, over the material of the body until the material is reached at the cossy, and it is material of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
And then the time was extended with that error of the physicians until the apostema became swollen, and there was a flow of materials many, and its cure was accordingly paused until the cossy became fistulada, and it made holes in the many openings which all poured pus and the fluids of the body.
And then the multitude of physicians was summoned around two years, and there was not wisdom in them but only in the art, until you were called.
And I saw the cossy of that man and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings for a great space; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilized, and the color of it was citrine.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those openings and reached the bone.
And accordingly, I and searched all the openings and found those that led to their parts of the cossy.
And then I carefully examined and incised one of the openings, and discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted, and already it was terrifying and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the cossy had been corrupted, having penetrated into the marrow.
And then I sewed up what was discovered and prepared from the bone that was uncovered.
And I cut away what was not in the bone but that corruption which had abscessed and needed to be cut away, and I had already cleaned it.
And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And accordingly, I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I sewed up what appeared to be from that corruption, and accordingly, I was pierced to make the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered on another occasion that the corruption had not ceased, and I did not cease to insert the small bone little by little, particularly and pierced it to make the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted around a palm's length of it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly, it was restored with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and section of him, except for the disposition of the fragile bone and for the scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, because to him it happened all hours for excessive evacuation of bad syncopy.
And therefore he is healed entirely, and nothing remains in place of osseous hard cartilage; and it is made good the disposition of him in his own body and return to its virtue; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in ambulation or harm in any cause.
But if it is a bone that protrudes in the body and is already worn out, then you must cut it according to this manner: take a ligament and stretch it at the end of that prominent bone; and command someone to extend it so far; and pause that ligament, taking a thicker piece of wool than the first one; and accordingly tie that over the flesh that remains on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh to the parts left over; and then uncover the flesh over the location where you want to sew, so that the seam will not cut into the flesh.
And pause a fust or table left over the bone, for when you do this it is not prohibited that the seam does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the suture be done little by little over the corrupted area, because if it is in the concavity of the bone, corruption and not apparent to the sense, and force another suture.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it's better to take away one part and connect it with another, and if the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover all the flesh in every part; and accordingly, pause a fust (fistula) there, and accordingly suture that from the first part where the corruption is, into the other part until the suturing of the other part is continued.
And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not reasonable but rather ingenious.
And if the corruption is in the pectoral region of the arm or chest, it's very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and what method you use to remove it, and according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with all ingenious means be corrected, except when it comes to veins or nerves.
And know that the incisors and the cuts to be made are many according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those bones, and their thickness, subtlety, greatness, and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; for it is necessary that you prepare all sorts of instruments convenient for each operation.
And know that this operation means nothing to you unless you have a great study and long experience of the instrument that you need; when with you is grand knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of experiences of illnesses, for then already you had it for yourself what is convenient for every illness.
And I will give you the name of the instruments which are simple and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. I think I've reached the end of this mysterious text!
Another one!
A bigger one!
A ray! The head of this ray is like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points are like the points on an astigmatic instrument.
And it's not necessary to do anything except that with this instrument you should scrape off the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is very large.
The form of the lesser razori (instrument):
The form of the flat razori (instrument):
The form of another type of saw (serra): Another one!
The form of the saw (razori) that has curvature:
Another subtle form of the saw (razori):
Another form of saw (razori) with a curved extremity:
The form of the small saw (rasori) that resembles a tenet:
The form of another smaller incisor:
The form of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, and the extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many locations in the ratio of bones:
The form of the ray that corresponds to the ratio of the one who is pierced by bones:
And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp edge.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly it should be noted that all the causes we have discussed regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
The incision extremities and the suturing of bones.
The extremities can be affected either by an internal or external cause, or as you will have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not come to pass, or sometimes the corruption goes to such a degree that it affects the member which is not struck by any cause, then it is necessary that you incise that member within this honor, so that the patient escapes through death or malice which is more deflement of the member.
And the sign of that to which it occurs is that the member becomes black until it is cut off, or one can approach the blackness until the burning coals are inside that member and take hold all over the body; and therefore I advise you to incise there.
And similarly, if it is a cause of corruption due to the percussion of certain venomous causes, such as that of the sea scorpion, or viper, or rattle snake, and similar.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that of the wrist of the elbow, and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the forearm.
And if it reaches that point, then you should incise the arm up to the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that point and reaches the shoulder joint, then it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause apart from this in treatment is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise that up to one of the joints.
And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it spreads into the ankle, then you should incise the calf up to the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already spread beyond the ankle, then there is no remedy but death, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of incising or sawing a member is to tighten one ligament in the part that you want to incise, and then tighten another ligament over the spot; and extend the minister's assistant with one ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister's assistant with another ligament in front; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, leaving a space of about an inch or so until all the flesh is exposed; and then incise or saw as needed.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over all the parts so that the area will not be touched, and that the patient will receive an adjusted lesion and a careful abscess.
But if bleeding occurs during the procedure, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powder to stop the bleeding; and then return to your medication as needed until it is complete.
And then bind the wounded member with ligaments at a suitable place, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that you try this on a man's foot, and if an accident occurs, as it did with me, which is when the blackness appeared on his foot due to the adjustment that was made to combustion of fire.
And that corruption occurred first in his toe, spreading throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself to try again with even more vigor than before to bring the cure to the member with great violence and pain, and he incised that foot up to the joint, and it was healed by fire.
Long time afterwards, that same corruption occurred in the finger of my hand.
And then it came to me, and so performed the repetition of that excess above my hand with a mixture of medicines, and thus brought about the purification of the body; and the excess was not re-absorbed and began to spread to another finger on my hand.
And the doctor told me to incise my hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping that the repercussions of that excess would subside on their own, but rather feared that incision of my hand would be mortal, for the patient's virtue was very precarious.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and I was told that the man prepared and incised his entire hand, and it was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to serve as an aid in understanding the nature of this disease, and to provide a significance by which it may be interpreted and acted upon.
On the cure of wounds and the quality of purging with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus flows out, and the wound remains like a vessel, with the skin above it appearing like fine cloth, and no further corruption occurs, nor does it penetrate into the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged and the corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure for it is that you incise the entire skinfold just as it is turned back, and most especially when it is thin and appears like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
But if you fear that the skinfold will adhere and that corruption will not be removed by direct consequence, and in the skinfold there is a breach on one side, then you should cure it with a poultice.
And this is how you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and if your nose is filled with fetid odor, then poultice that area with Egyptian medicine which is made from oil, vinegar, and zinc receiving equal parts, and adjust them in a vessel, and apply them to the fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches a sweet melting point.
And then you take from it the amount that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and poultice that area with the mixture, and strengthen the opening of the sinus, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
And then extract that poultice with great care; and do so for as many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is poulticed with ash water, when this medicine is not present; and so you take the ash of vetch, and mix it with water; and then add that to the poultice and apply it to the area until you are certain that the sinus has been completely cleared.
And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then poultice that area with honey and water mixed with finely ground zinc, and poultice that area with vinegar and honey mixed, because of the property of honey that it purifies and cleanses, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and most especially when there is excess stipticity and dryness in the vinegar.
And when you do this a few times and are confident that the sinus is now cleared, then poultice that area with water that makes the skin appear in it.
And so take a mixture of diaphanous and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic vinegar; or poultice that area with some medicines and ointments that have properties which I have written about in the treatise on remedies.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot be received by the cannula of the poultice, then you should dilate that orifice with a small iron instrument gradually, and pause in it wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilic ointment until it is dilated.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you should add the edges of it with a suture and leave a quantity in which the poultice can be added.
And if the orifice from which the stench flows is elevated above the parts above, then dry that out at the lowest point of it so that the stench can flow back into it, for when the stench is constricted in the sinus the flesh will be generated within it.
And if it is not possible to dry out the sinus within the vicinity of the bone at the lowest point, then you should pierce that member with preparation so that the stench flows slightly from it according to your apparel and is not retained by any cause in it.
But that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which you should leave in place for an entire hour because it is adjusted to be on the stench. And so that you may know whether what comes from the stench is much or little, or is digested or not.
And so you should consider the location of that sinus, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And when your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is shed on the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adherence, then lift it up or remove it three days later, and when you remove the wound, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
But if the sinus has a long space underneath it where subtle virus resides, then do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it approaches, and because some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and those who are opposite to this.
And if from the sinus there are many days of undigested stench, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if there is a delay in the adhesion of the sinus and it is caused by prolongation, then you should adjust to drying up with medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they are dried up like diaphanous ointment, when there is excessive addition of zegi.
And the most excellent medicine of all that is used to heal it is this: take diaphanous ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and spread it over the area where the old wound is located in its substance, and then apply that to it, and use it.
And it seems to work in that action, when there is no stench, diaphanous ointment, honey when it is mixed with the heat and becomes thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and gallnuts, and grind them all together and powderize them on the honey which is placed over the fire, and then line it up with water on cloth and strengthen that over the sinus; and line it up with the honey which you have mixed with the heat and becomes thickened, and powderize it on cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes administer to it aristology longa and roots of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of ears and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them together and powderize them on the honey which I have recommended; and apply it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and it already shows signs of inquiry in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you should treat it with fistular cure, just as it is said above.
On the cure of boils, worn-out nails, and incisions of fingers added and sections.
Boils are abscesses that form under the nail of the finger or toe, and spread to other fingers and toes. As they become prolonged and their cure is more precious, they either abscess with caution, or corrupt, and emit a stench into the bone until it becomes putrid, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes gangrenous, and its color becomes dark.
And therefore, when you have applied the water that we have mentioned in the division and your cure does not bring relief, then it is necessary to incise with iron all the superfluous flesh that remains from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound with water, for cauterization is very helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already consumed the flesh to the inner parts, and it begins to pierce and puncture that flesh, then you should pause a subtle ray below the angle of the nail where the flesh is pierced, and push it up and incise that flesh with ease, and pause above what remains of the flesh with medicines that corrode into what is left; and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to incise the bone and extract it, for there is no time when a corrupted bone can be healed.
And if the corrosion and corruption go to the finger, then you should incise it in one of the nodes according to what is remembered of its recollection, and then cure it until it is healed.
But if the nail is inflamed with percussion or attrition, and there is great pain in it, then you should at first bleed the patient, and then cut off the nail with a sharp spatula making a transverse incision from top to bottom, and take care that the incision does not reach into the flesh that is left under the nail, lest you cause the patient's severe pain to become even more intense, and thus occasion the nativity of superfluous flesh in the area; and then cure that place with water that relieves pain.
But this adjustment, which is natural in most men, is that it is flesh all, and sometimes in the bones, or sometimes in the nail.
And some of them are born in the joint of the bone, or it is the nativity of them in certain nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not become bad, and that which is born in the joints is very bad.
And of those that are born as fleshiness, the section is light, and it is because you should incise the root with a spatula.
But of that which is born in the joint of the bone, the cure is difficult; and therefore take care to avoid the abscess.
But in that which is born on the finger, you should remove the nodes; first incise the flesh of it with an incision round to the bone, and then cut with one of those scissors that are suitable for this purpose, and then cure it until it is healed.
But the consolidation that occurs on the fingers between their joints or by the nativity of the human being that is present in it, or by consolidation of wound or by burning with fire, or by similar things, then it is necessary to cut through that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between their cloths with the enfused oil in rose oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs on some fingers with the palm, then you should cut through that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
The incision of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and also enveloped thick veins full of melancholic superfluities which come forth in great bulk from the members of the body, and most commonly occur in the hips, and most particularly in the hips of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer purification of the body with black choleric purgation some times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient's blood be drawn from the Basilic vein.
But the cure of theirs with iron is according to two manners: one is that you should incise and attract that black blood, and the other manner is that you should raise the vein and extract all.
The section of it is according to this manner: first broach the hip with cold water very much until the thick blood is resolved, which is feculent from the hip, and then strengthen the hip of the patient at the uppermost part of the cask below the fold of the skin, and then cut off the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with the tourniquet at the lower part of the hip into it, and from above to below, until the amount of blood that you want and which is necessary has been removed, and which takes away the virtue of the patient.
And then lie down and command to yourself that you shall abstain from eating black choleric foods that generate.
And iterate the cure through bleeding when the veins are filled and notice to the patient.
But the elevation of theirs is according to this manner: you who raise the hip of the patient, if it is in its place by the strength of their legs, and then put it in bathwater and broach the hip with cold water until it becomes red and the veins are swollen; or that they be exercised vigorously if bathwater is not present, until the member is scorched.
And then cut the cord in the right side of the vein by sectioning in the long or the last part of it, or in the lowest part of it you will find the thread.
And then tie the cord with knots and excise the vein entirely from top to bottom until it appears in its natural state, and it is necessary to recognize the appearance of it which sometimes that old lady requests to decline into darkness.
And then as you untie and cut the cord, you will find that white thread which is the cord.
And then you should put it down that white thread into the ray so that it is elevated and thrown away from the cord, and suspend it with one ounce of lion's claw.
And then make another incision right next to that incision for three fingers, and then excise the cord from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
And then raise it and incise it in the back section of the thread, and then extract it and elevate it until it is removed through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And then do this until you extract it from the highest or uppermost section of all the sections, until everything is removed; and then incise it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it up and extract it, or insert it below the ray and turn your hand around all parts until it is thrown away. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is torn, it will be difficult to elevate the thread and it will come back to harm the patient through that damage.
And when the thread is completely removed, then pause over the place of the wound with a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil and cold oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is constricted due to twisting and turning that wraps around the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then you must cut through all the twisted parts of it and at the places of wrapping of it, and then suspend it with knots until you elevate it completely.
And be careful that your incision does not cut into the vein and does not harm it, for if you do, it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your prudence in this.
The form of the incident in which the vein is cut:
It is not like that at all, nor is it similar to the knots or needles, and it is not of sharp extremity in order that it may not harm the vein; but it is of great flexibility like a lion's claw, so if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; having an excessive thickness, just as we have said.
On the extraction of the saphenous vein:
This vein is generated in the hips, in cold lands like those of the Atigians in Arabia and in dry and barren lands of little fertility in India, where there is no grass nor broom.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the hips.
And its generation is from putrefaction that follows the cord, just as venom drips out of the body of serpents and worms and scorpians, and worms generating between the cord and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of its coming is this: that vein which happens in the hip becomes inflamed with great heat; and near the place, it vesicates; and near as it begins to emerge from that vesication, it looks like a root of a plant.
And then when the extremity appears from him, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one-third of a dragon's weight, and notarize that and leave the lead suspended from the thigh.
And as many times as you find some cause at the parts outside, wrap it in lead and tie that. And if it is prolonged, then you must incise one part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut that which is of reason until it is fully outside, for if you cut that, it will be constricted and enter into the flesh and cause apostema, pus formation, and bad ulceration in the place.
Because it is necessary to be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is fully removed from the last part of it and there is not any remaining cause in the body.
And from this vein, it has been found in some men who are twenty palms long and I have already seen one that is thirty palms.
And if it is incised during the hour of its medication, then insert the ray into the wound and perforate it with a long hole in the body, until all that which is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it through the healing of apostemas.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most particularly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes to have many openings, and is found from each opening a branch.
And therefore cure it as we have said in the division, and with what is above mentioned.
On the excision of worms generated under the skin and called "Aegritudo Bovina".
This illness is called "malautia bovina" in some land because it often happens to oxen and there is a worm that is born between the cord and the flesh, and it goes throughout the whole body up and down, and it is shown to the sense of the individual's own member by member until it breaks the cord and comes out.
And its generation is due to putrefaction of some humors, just as it happens with worms and serpents and lizards in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then very strong heat arises in it and enters and destroys the brain, and thus many times.
And therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, you must not do so unless you have first made the patient's ambulation and appearance manifest to the sense, and then you must strengthen what is above it and what is below it with a strong bond, and then cut above it and extract that.
And if it is pressed into the flesh and you do not attend to it, then you must pause a cauterization with fire on the location until it dies, and the greatest fear that is feared is corruption of it, which corrupts the location as we have said.
And if you notice that the condition has reached the head near the brain, then strengthen above the skull with a strong stricture, and then cut above it, and extract that; and see to it that the patient uses purgation of their own body with medicines evacuating putrid humors, and beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On the excision of the affliction called "Nafir".
This illness is called "Nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and it spreads from member to member.
And you have already seen it, as I recommended. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein that runs down the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation go away as if it were a worm rising up to this point, but more slowly than would be proper, as if it were silver alive when it moves from place to place.
And then I went to the pain in that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and after a little while, it stuck there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then I told myself that it was revolving itself throughout its own body, according to what you saw; and it was too marvelous to me the permutation of it and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen something similar to this in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many others which are painful and changed from member to member. But I did not see it with the veins as I saw it in the woman.
And I did not think it was just this, but because the woman was old, with dry skin and veins that were visible, and in this way, the appearance of that swelling appeared to the sense.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reversal in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with veins that are softened.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at their head as we have said, but instead strengthen above that point and let it dry slightly over that area until that swelling is reduced, and then cauterize the location.
But if you do not take it into account in your own veins, then cure that by purging the body and by what evacuates swellings, and with those pills made of fetid things and with pills of sarpia and similar substances.
On the Extraction of Sagittas.
Sagetas are diversified according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they reside, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, which are solid; and others have three angles, and those with tongues; and those with stars.
And among the signs of death is when the sageta appears in the skull, breaks through the bone, and emerges from the cerebrum which lies above the brainstem, for it causes by its intense heat, scotoma, vertigo, roaring in the ears, inflammation and roaring of the tongue, spasms and mixing up of understanding, vomiting of bile, and very strong language is cut off and destroyed the voice. And it emerges from the location of the wound a white humidity like powder, and you see it similar to the moisture of the flesh.
And therefore if you see these signs, then you should abstain from the cure and extraction of the sageta, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the sageta when it appears in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels like a hard lump, and not a soft one; and very strongly the movement of the sageta resembles the movement of the pulse, and there is bleeding from the wound with black blood, and there is numbness in the extremities, and cold shivering, and syncope; and therefore know that death is descending upon you.
And the signs when the sageta has attacked the lung are that it is accompanied by frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and a great amount of spirit expires, and he demands attraction of cold air.
And if the sageta appears in the vermilion of the legs, and the pain is located near the small bones of the ribs, and a great cry arises with intense pain and sighing, and none of the muscles are spared.
And if the sageta appears in the stomach, then very quickly one sees food from the wound that is undigested.
And if the sageta appears in the abdomen and is fixed there, then one sees some opening from the wound, or a tear, or a bladder that is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure of the wound through extraction of the sageta.
And if the sageta appears in the bladder and is passed outside as urine, and causes some external damage to the surrounding areas, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
But other members such as the face, neck, and shoulders, and the spines of the back, and the furcula, and the coccyx, and the pelvis, and their likenesses of members, are saved according to the greater dispositions when the sageta does not touch a vein or artery and is not a venomous sageta.
And I recommend this to you, that which I have seen of the nature of these sagetas, by which you may signify for this on the cure itself.
Which is because in one man, a sageta appeared in the lacrimal duct of the eye socket, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the grey matter of the ear intact, and he was healed, and there was no harm done to his eye.
And I extracted another sageta from a Jew, which appeared in the grey matter of his eye socket, leaving it behind the eyelid and then hidden, and only a small tip remained attached to the stalk, and it was a great sageta of the sharp sagetas of the Turks, with a lion's claw that had no ears.
And so the Jew recovered, and did not experience any further harm in his eye.
And I extracted another sageta from a Christian man, which was lodged in the shoulder, and it was an Arab sageta, and it had ears; and then I cut into it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the shoulder joint of his arm; and then I carefully removed it, and thus extracted it, and the Christian man was healed.
And I extracted another sageta from a man who was lodged in his abdomen, and thought he would die from it; and so, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred in his dispositions, I cut into the sageta and worked around it, and he was healed, and there was no further harm to him.
And I saw a man in whom a sageta had lodged in his back, and the wound was consolidated over it, and after seven years, the sageta emerged in the root of the spine.
And I saw a woman in whom a sageta had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound was consolidated on the inside, and there was no change in her dispositions in seven years, and the woman did not experience any harm or discomfort in her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom a sageta had lodged on his face and the wound was consolidated and remained there without causing any great pain or distress.
And I extracted the sageta from the nose of the king's son, which was lodged in the middle part of his nose and had already begun to decline towards the right side, and all of the sageta was hidden.
And I was called for the cure of him within three days after the appearance of the sageta.
And then I approached the wound of the sageta with great care; and then I asked her if she felt any pain, but she didn't feel anything; only she felt a prickling sensation behind the right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the sageta.
And I applied a poultice to the location with an attractive and digestive plaster, convincing myself that the location was becoming inflamed because it appeared to me as if the location of the sageta had become apostemated, causing me to bleed over it.
And there was no significant accident in the location that the sageta had obtained, and I continued to apply the plaster over it for many days and there was no accident; and the wound consolidated at the same time, and the patient's condition improved through space of many days until one day he felt the sageta inside his nose and recognized it to me.
And then I applied medicine acute corrosive to the wound for many days until it was fully open, and with a tentative touch I cut away that part of the sageta which was attached to the stalk.
And then I adjusted the position of the wound with that medicine acute until it became visible to me as if the tip of the sageta had appeared, and passed away from my sight after some time through the space of four months.
And then as the wound became more amplified, and it was possible for me to enter the fingers into it, I remained there and did not stop until it was fully restored, whereas I had previously ceased subtlety and ingenuity in handling it with manual skills, until one day I began to take hold of it with forceps descenting faytas, according to the form that would come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed with complete health, and there is no inconvenience in him in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sagetas, for which pause over this rule and significance that I have not said, because the parts of this art and its definitions are not comprehended through narration or comprehended by free will.
And the artists wise compare themselves with few on a little matter, and also over what is present and what is absent; and find new operation and new instruments necessary for the descent of external causes of art when accidents occur.
And therefore I say that sagetas are not abandoned by the members in which they are lodged, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the contrary of the other part.
And that which is attracted by the place into which it enters, or is a sageta proceeding from a carnous location, and is drawn and abandoned.
And if it does not obey the order of the hour in which it appears, then you must let it be for some days until the flesh around it becomes softened and its attraction and egression are alleviated.
And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and does not obey your order, then let it be for some days and iterate its attraction and motion each day, and it will eventually be abandoned.
And if it does not obey your order after some days, then you must pierce the circle of the sageta in that bone with a subtle taravel all around until the location is amplified by the sageta, and then extract it.
But if the sageta has become hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you must inquire into it with tentative touch, and if you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot act upon it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the preon (a type of surgical instrument), and here there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then you must feel over the wound until it is amplified and it becomes possible to extract the sageta.
And if you have a pair of forceps with which to hold it, then you must deliver the flesh in which it is lodged from all around with all the skill that you can muster; and manipulate over this, if you cannot achieve evasion through the fracture of the forceps and the torsion of those parts until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the sageta in each location where it is, then you must use with torsion of your hand and forceps all around until it obeys; and subtlety with subtle subtlety that the sageta is not broken and that it is made to be easily attracted by you and extracted.
And if you are unable to extract it at your first attempt, then let it be for some days until the parts around it can relax and settle, and then iterate on it when it is alleviated. But if it causes bleeding against your will, then you must administer what we have said in our chapter on healing.
And guard your virtue of insidiousness in veins or nerves or cord, and administer skill in all manner possible to the evasion of the sageta; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as we have recounted.
And then that you may counteract the sageta in such a way that the patient is according to the figure in which the settling of the sageta takes place, for it is more justifiable. But if this is not possible for you, then you must administer according to what is possible for you by the figures.
But the sagetas that are abandoned by the contrary of the other part, or which have already proceeded into some part outside, or which cause gilbositat (a type of swelling) at the extremity of the sageta through sensation from the upper part of the cord and sometimes become elevated; then you must cease over it; and let the cessation be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then attract it, for it is made easy by the ceasing.
But if it is retained in the bone, then you must twist the instrument according to the contrary tendency until the sageta presses into the bone, and amplify as much as possible, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then iterate on it until it yields.
And if the stalk of the sageta is in that place, then you must push it into the cavity.
But if the stalk has fallen and you must administer impulse, then you must introduce the instrument into that place, if it is deaf (i.e. numb or unresponsive), use a concealed instrument so that it enters the cavity of the body and approaches the tip of the sageta and then push it into the cavity.
But if the sageta is concave, then you must push it with a strong instrument that enters into it, because the sageta is alleviated by that.
And if the sageta is entrenched, then it is necessary that you concave all the flesh in which it is located, if it is at your disposal, and then cure it with what is convenient.
And if the sageta grows in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and is near enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is at your disposal to cut above it, then cut above it and guard yourself from insidiousness of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if needed, and cure it until it is healed.
Form of forceps which are attracted to the sagetas:
Their extremities are like the beaks of eagles, made as if with a saw when they take hold on the sageta so that it does not leave.
And of these there are many species, great, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of greatness of the sageta and its paucity, and the amplitude of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Like a ray, so that the instrument is alleviated from entering into the concave sageta and is pushed along with it.
On the surgery of veins:
The veins of bleeding which are cut by bleeding surgery. of which there are 16 in the head. So it is two pulsating veins that are near the ears, as said by some; two herbs that are in the two temples, apparent ones; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two holes which are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guides that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip;  these are the veins that are called algelic ; and so two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are cut in the arms are five. Because one of these is the cephalic vein, and it belongs to the wild breast; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and numb, and it is a middle vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name it "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is situated in the domestic breast, and is named "citillar", and they call it "the vein of the belly" by the common folk; and the arm veins, and it is situated above the elbow, and it is the one that is ligated, and it is the one that appears over the elbow in a manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two branches.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of these is the one that lies below the curvature of the armpit of the wild breast; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic breast; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild breast; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to these.
The bleeding of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, ancient and migrainous and sahaftic and ulcerous evils of the head, old.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I have recounted to you: it is that the patient's head be shaved, and the patient's head be rubbed in the occipital region with a cloth and good friction; then attract the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two veins and their locations appear near the ears in two places above the head; and want them to say "yes" with your said tie, and if you feel the pulse of those with the said tie, here sign it.
Take the lancet-cutting instrument and it is that which is incised, and take it and introduce it below the vein in the cord so that the bleeding comes to the bone. And then lift your arm and raise the vein and cord to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incision that is incised. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make come out as much blood as you wish.
And then strengthen with poultices and let it remain until it is healed.
And now and previously in the beginning of the book, I have described the incision of those and their cauterization.
But of the two arterial veins that are on the temples, the bleeding is for ancient and bad migraines, frequent and severe eye problems, and acute effusions of fluids to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I have recounted to you: constrain the patient's neck so that the two veins appear by sense perception, and be demonstrated the pulse of them below the said tie; and then sign it with your said tie.
And then lift the cord above the vein to the upper parts with the said tie indicated, and introduce the bleeding instrument incised below, and lift the vein upwards; and incise it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause the said tie over the vein for an hour, and then pause on that spot with poultices and strengthen that above with a strong constriction, and let it remain until it is healed.
And now it is preceded by the recollection of theirs, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And therefore the bleeding of the vein of the forehead is for appropriate bleeding of the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face and ancient migraines, and for pain and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of bleeding there is according to what I have recounted to you: so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named "fossori" and this is its shape:
Pause the point which is prominent at the head of the fossori above that vein and puncture on it with a slight or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
And some times it is opened by bleeding the lat, however it does not need to be of acute extremity like other bleedings, but rather from the lateral extremity, and bleeding that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strong enough to break through it with the bleeding when it is subtle.
But the bleeding of the two veins that are on the lacrimal ducts of two holes is for scabs of the eyes by reason of pain and sob in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the bleeding is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then you should be standing above it.
And it is done the bleeding according to the transverse at a long length with a little blood, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bleeding is subtle, then forthwith the extremity of it is broken.
And then make the blood flow as much as is necessary to you, and pause on those spots, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
But the bleeding of the vein of the nose is corresponding to acute fever and intense sweating, and to diseases of the face and ancient migraines that occur on the face, and most particularly when it is old.
And the quality of the bleeding there is that the patient strengthens their neck and you take hold of your left hand with your right hand, and take the subtle bleeding instrument long and place it in the middle location of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear by sense perception here, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
It is necessary that you conclude your right hand with the bleeding instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your necessity; and then bind it for one night, because it is restored a little more.
But the purpose of the bleeding of the two guides is to relieve constriction and the beginning of leprosy, and to many diseases, impetigo, and bad ulcers that are corrosive like herpes.
And the quality of the bleeding there is that the patient strengthens each one below in their neck with a bandage; and the artist stands above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then bleed the vein at length with an ample and small bleeding instrument little by little; and then extract blood according to seasonable quantity or as much as is necessary, and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the bandage and strengthen both veins with a middle-sized constriction so that the patient is not befuddled, and let it remain until morning when the wound is healed.
And the purpose of bleeding the veins in the Algerich region is to cure small apostemes and pustules on the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are on the nose and in its circuit.
And the quality of bleeding there is that you make the patient look at you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and regard the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other is on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those veins are small black ones; and then you incise each one with an incised instrument.
But if you are in doubt about which one is the correct one, and do not know which one of those is the true one, then take the incision of the largest of those, and the most manifest one.
And make the same appearance as the two veins that are on the lips above.
But for the two veins that are on the left side of the tongue, the purpose is to bleed the cephalic vein in order to relieve symptoms that occur in the gullet, to treat the disease of the uvula, and to treat diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of bleeding there is that you follow the patient between your eyes and in front of the sun, and lift up their tongue, and look down at their tongue, on one side of their vein and on the other side of their vein, and the color of each one declines to blackness.
And then bleed each one; and be careful not to conclude your right hand in bleeding those, because below those are arteries.
And your veins that are bled in the cleft are those in which costumarily flows in all men, and the bleeding of theirs is done according to two manners, or they put on the bleeding instrument a mirtillat or olivary one at subtlety declining; or cut off with a bleeding instrument a cullinary one, and call it thus, and this is its form:
So the side of it is as follows: thus, it corresponds to opening the concave veins that are full and proceeding with apparent large ones, and to those which contain gross blood.
And this bleeding is of smaller latitude and more subtle extremity, and corresponds to bleeding the subtle veins that contain subtle citrus-colored blood.
But the purpose of bleeding the Basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is to extract blood from diseases that are below the gullet and the neck, and therefore to relieve the feet and belly.
And the bleeding operator should be careful when bleeding this, and be over-cautious in it, because below it is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the bleeding instrument, he will incise that artery and cause a flux of blood, for which reason it is necessary not to bleed this with a piercing instrument, but rather to cut with alnessil.
And if the Basilic vein does not appear in a manifest way, then it is necessary that you leave it and move to another, or seek out some branch of yours; or bleed at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and cut it off with alnessil as we have said.
But if you wish to perform the bleeding on the median line, then it is necessary that you do so before the constriction of the arm that touches the location within which you know the location of the fingers, and approach placing your hand above with a tencha; and approach binding the arm and cutting off the vein with concave section using alnessil as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery at any distance from the location.
And when you bleed, as you strengthen the bandage, swelling occurs in the location that you have marked with a tencha, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if the blood flows in the bleeding like golden tears of an infant, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the artery; and therefore you should hold your breath and pause for a long time over that spot; and approach placing your hand on top of it, and if the blood is absconded, because many vessels are absconded, then you should strengthen the arm and leave that.
And watch over the patient from the morning on, and be over-cautious of them and do not neglect that for some days until they are healed.
But if the blood is not absconded and you are not present to apply medicine, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is absconded; or that you take a poultice of fistula, and make it flow, and take one half of it and strengthen it over the location of the vein with constriction downwards with bandage and powder until the next day.
And therefore if the blood is absconded, it is good; and if not, then cure that with what preceded to the remembrance of the location of the powder-absorbing flow of blood.
And the absconding of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But the bleeding of the Vena Fusca is a purpose that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; therefore it is composed of branches of the Basilic and Cephalic veins, as we have said.
And the bleeding operator should be over-cautious in the bleeding of this, because below it is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the bleeding instrument and finds the nerve, he will cause numbness to it, and it will be difficult to heal, and very likely it will not be fully healed. And this nerve many times appears to the sensation; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and does not show itself, then it is necessary that you pause the bleeding with the instrument with which you are bleeding with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your force.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should find the vein in its length.
The purpose of bleeding the Cephalic vein is to extract blood from the head and to relieve diseases of the eyes.
And it is necessary to do so precisely, if you want to bleed with a piercing instrument, either with an olive-shaped one or a mirth-shaped one; because it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither artery nor nerve below.
But often very many times, when it is not bled in the first percussion, the swelling does not appear until later.
The first one is that which you should know: bleeding is not administered except for the preservation of health and by hope of recovery and caution against the event of diseases; and that bleeding should be done on one of the three veins in the armpit, namely: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, after a fast during spring and autumn, and in winter just before consumption, when signs of repletion appear.
And it should be done bleeding at the third day or at the first moment that three hours have passed since sunrise.
But bleeding that is administered, it is when it provokes convenience and necessity for that, or at night or during the day, in any hour and at any time.
And it is necessary that children not be bled until they are fourteen years old, and women should not be bled unless they have completed their fourteenth month after giving birth, and the elderly should not be bled if they have already passed one hundred years.
And when anyone wants to be bled in some way or other, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before the bleeding with a leon's clister, if there is a great fissure retained, so that the veins do not carry away the superfluous things from the bleeding of the bowels, which are pure, and thus not harm the principal members.
And do not be bled if you are suffering from nausea and vomiting, or if you have a bad illness or intoxication, or if you have been drained of your strength and vitality, nor if you are afflicted with dropsy, nor yet if you should bleed due to colic passion, vomiting, or bowel distress, or if there is multiplication of coitus, travail, and exercise, or from fasting or vigilance, or for any reason that dissolves the virtue, whether bodily or animal.
And also consider the subtleties of airs and vapors before this if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And also enter into bath if no cause prohibits, or exercise through some exercise in order that the blood may be subtletized.
And pause the bleeding at noon, around the hour of tercia, as we have said.
And force yourself to keep the peace in that day of all animal accidents, as is anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as is travail and excessive pain, and similar things.
And have the same person make themselves present to the causes in the use of that which is customary among people, with aromaticity and odour, and with balms and similar things, according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the bleeding operator on a couch that is higher than the one on which the person to be bled should sit.
And also remove the person's arm, and wipe it with their own hand or with the bleeding operator's hands twice or three times; and then strengthen the bandage with a cord and wrap it around the area twice.
And the constriction should be early, because the constriction when not equal or the constriction is with superfluity, then prohibits flows of blood; or it is with mollification, and then prohibits only the flowing of blood.
And also the constriction should be such that the person to be bled wipes their hands together between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the sense.
And also the bleeding operator should take a little bit of old olive oil and apply it to their own bleeding instrument; and then pause their left index finger on that vein, below the location where the bleeding is desired, so that the vein will flow a little bit, and the percussion will be settled, because the veins are like strings that flee from the bleeding instrument, and those are full of airiness, and when the bleeding operator pauses their instrument over that one, it becomes constricted, and the bleeding instrument falls away; and the vein is not filled, and if it is filled, then it is stretched.
And therefore, it is necessary for the bleeding operator to be fixed and solicitous in all these causes.
And also depause the bleeding instrument, but if the vein is huberta in one spot, then that's good; and otherwise, you should iterate this process on another spot nearby, or over it at a feast, if the location is not swollen.
And if the location is swollen or the disease is spreading, then you should leave it alone for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, because it may attract a swelling caution, nor enter into bathing.
And also iterate the bleeding procedure if needed.
And if the warning is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not yield the quantity of blood you desire, then you should iterate the bleeding procedure on that spot according to rectitude and adjust it slightly in the warning, and do so at a feast before the location becomes swollen, because in many men's bodies, the location becomes swollen with little warning.
But if it has already become swollen, then do not iterate on it, because there is no excuse for you; and pause on some part of the oil's gash, because it relieves the blood's heart. And it is better in this location that you use olive oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer a gash of oil in all bleeding procedures where you bleed the veins according to the prohibition of blood's heart, and make it tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when one is paused on one of those spots over the location, because the blood is subtletized and revolved when it is thick.
And if a great swelling is generated in the location of the bleeding, which often occurs, and especially to that person who has not been bled before, or in the warning of the vein being slight, then you should apply compresses, and pause on the spot with a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, until it is dissolved.
And it is necessary to do this similarly with the sediment of blood from that vein, with the complement of either one or another vein.
And if it remains in the location for some days with some blackness or greenish tint, do not worry about this; and if you wish, pause on that spot with some cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or some cause of mentastre's sap or calament, or something similar.
And often such swellings and elevations occur as a result of bleeding from the basilica.
And therefore pause your hand over that spot, and if you find mollicia, then apply your compress on that spot, but if that eminence is bad and evil; and then be careful not to pause on that spot with any of the causes we have mentioned, because it may flow from the artery's blood.
And make an ointment with this on that spot where it is stiptic, so that the location may be tempered, and apply care to that spot with another cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract from the blood for every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears on top of the blood as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you should let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if it is thick, then you should let it flow out until it becomes subtletized; and similarly if it is sharp, until the acidity of it is removed.
And it is necessary for that person who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting in one spot, to have the bleeding procedure of the vein amplified and the bleeding instrument made large.
And in that person who is frail, do the opposite of what was said before; and it is necessary to extract blood from them in multiple spots, and that the incision should be narrow.
And the best way that is administered in bleeding of vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this manner of bleeding is saved from flow of blood and inflammation of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more saving than bleeding according to latitude and longitude.
And to which one is accustomed to occur syncope, it is necessary to perform the bleeding procedure after taking care of that person with a little bit of pa infused in vinegar of milgranas or simple oxymel scalded; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
And if it is a case of congestion or completion, then take care before the bleeding procedure by infusing pa in myrrh's essence or in aromatic honey with species such as pepper, cinnamon, gingerbread, and similar substances, or in aromatic essence with many odors.
And if syncope occurs during bleeding, and it is the cause of excessive blood loss, then take care to drink water with beef broth and a subtle odorous essence; and use aromatics with a little bit of salt, and anoint your feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope by evacuation.
And who wants to eventuate their arm and dissolve their blood according to the second degree, must be done by one whose bleeding is for moderate evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
But who wants to eventuate their arm and let out their blood according to the third degree, and whose body is strong, then do it about 7 or 8 hours after the first bleeding.
But who wants to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, then do it on the second or third day.
But in that body where there is already a lot of scalded and acidic blood that causes fever, it is necessary to extract the blood from one spot and let out a large quantity, and amplify the warning until syncope occurs; but you must have preserved all the conditions for bleeding; and pause your hand over the pulse of the blood in order to avoid death instead of syncope, because many times this happens when the bleeding operator is ignorant and negligent.
And do not attempt to release the arm and evacuate the blood in the second degree when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press strongly on it with vehemence and bend it slightly outward, because this is too bad.
Let it be until it is bloodletted secondarily; or remove this with the acidity of the bleeding that is coagulated in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that with tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with a light compression until the blood is outside.
And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and don't touch it until the swelling subsides.
And if necessity demands that you must evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then you should let out some blood from another location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is bloodletted in the location of the fossa or basilica when it is not obstructed or hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the bleeding procedure is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the finger becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
And it should be made strong on that spot with a gentle pressure and mild constriction; and the bleeding procedure should be done transversely, not longitudinally nor according to length.
And let it be a broad warning and your bleeding procedure with which you bleed that spot at the joint of the hand, a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should insert your hand into cold water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your desired outcome.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from inserting your hand into cold water, and instead pause the blood's flow into cold water during the time of winter.
And the bleeding procedure from this vein is more saving than from all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
And the bleeding procedure from the vein in the right arm is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of bleeding from this vein is that you should strengthen your hand with gentle pressure or with your own hand, more than you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and clearly demonstrated; and then bleed transversely; and if it does not flow out well, do not hesitate to repeat.
And take care that you do not leave your hand in the bleeding procedure, because it is possible that the nerves of the fingers are exposed to the bone.
And then insert your hand into cold water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not insert it into cold water, the blood will clot at the orifice of the vein, and the flow will be prohibited.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it will not be consolidated too quickly; and similarly, you should do this in every limb.
But the bleeding procedure from the vein of the left arm is related to diseases of the gallbladder.
And do similarly in the bleeding procedure from this one, just as you have done in the other.
And the significance of the sephena vein in bloodletting is related to diseases that are located on the part behind the body, just as it is related to diseases of the hips, and retention of menstruation, and diseases of the lungs and ulcerous sores on the bones and joints of old age, and similar diseases.
And the quality of bleeding from this vein is that the patient should insert their foot into cold water and make a friction on it until the veins appear; and then apply the ligature to the joint of the foot with a cord; and the location of the vein, when it becomes apparent, should be marked by the said toe, and from there it should ramify into the face of the foot like branches.
And therefore bleed more abundantly from below the knee to above the ankle, and mark the spot with a knot, because it is better and safer.
And if you bleed from the face of the foot, then be careful not to touch the nerves that are located underneath it on the face of the foot; and pause your bleeding procedure with which you bleed transversely, as if you were going to cut into it.
And may the bleeding be good.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you should insert the foot into cold water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
And if the bleeding operator makes a mistake in the first degree, then repeat the procedure with a little less force, because the spot is sensitive; and do not be afraid of the evil one, but rather beware of the nerves just as we have said.
And do similarly with the sephena vein of the other foot as well.
And of the sciatic vein, the location as we have said should be marked below the socket of the wilderness partition.
And the significance of bleeding from this vein is for sciatica when it is accompanied by bloody discharge.
And the quality of bleeding from this vein is that the patient should enter a bath, and hasten and strengthen the grip on the cuddy of the lathe above the ankle, up to four fingers' width, wrapped in a thin bandage, so that it does not appear except by means of this.
And therefore, when it appears, then you should bleed that vein according to each person's ability and according to the transverse direction, and it is better; or cut into it by incision or cut off a piece of it, because the spot is sensitive.
And it is in many men's veins that are somewhat meager; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then bleed some part of it, and it is that which appears on the two sides of the foot opposite the said auricular and anular.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you desire.
And then release the constriction and pause over the spot of the bleeding cut, and strengthen the spot, because it will heal more quickly.
The art of ventilation and the qualities of using those [ventilation techniques].
Ventilation is done with combs, or with horns, or with a very thin tube.
And ventilation is done in two ways: one of them is through scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation without scarification is done in two ways: one of them is with heat and the other is without heat.
And there are 14 locations in the body where ventilation is administered with scarification and blood extraction. One of these locations is alnocrati, which is located at the back of the head; and one half location on both sides of the neck; and ventozas of the mento below the mandible and below the mouth; and ventozas of two spatulas; and ventozas of alohoster, which is located at the end of the coccyx; and ventozas of two foetiles, which are located on both breasts; and ventozas of two cavities; and ventozas of two cuoysses.
And ventilation does not extract blood, but rather from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not counteract the virtue through those [small veins], just as it is counteracted through bleeding; nor is it necessary to perform ventilation with or without heat in any illness caused by repletion until the entire body has been evacuated.
But if necessity demands it for illness or for continuity, administer that [ventilation] at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any other time as needed.
And therefore, when one is in some cause of those [symptoms], and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that ventilation be done more than usual two or three hours after day.
And the significance of ventoziation on the back of the neck is that when it converges with gravity in the head and causes it to sink into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventozation is located at the site of bleeding from the cephalic vein.
And it is not permitted to use that which is of complete complexity, or in one who has catarrh, because it gives great harm to him.
And therefore it is not necessary to use that [method] on the old, and in those whose heads are diseased.
But to one who is continuously experiencing it [ventoziation] on his head, forgetfulness ensues; and therefore you must command the ventozator to pause for a little while at the partitions below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But ventoziation of alkahel is in the location of bleeding from the vena fusca and basilica; and therefore it converges with asthma, constriction of the lungs, splitting of the lung's substance, and coughing, and repletion.
And it is necessary to moderate the alkahel ventozation a little bit, because if it is paused below, it will generate weakness in the body and stomach.
And the ventoziation of alhagdahan converges with accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, emigration, preoccupation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is located at the site of bleeding from the basilica.
And it is necessary to command the ventozator not to press their hand with scarification, so that the artery does not get injured and blood flow does not occur.
And ventoziation below the mento converges with ulcers in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and similarities to those diseases that are present in the mouth; and it is located at the site of bleeding from the aliheric which is present on both lips.
But the ventoziation that is done on both spatulas converges with caphatan, which is caused by repletion of heat.
And the ventoziation of both sides of the foetiles converges with the bleeding from three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because it attracts blood from all those smaller veins that are present in the flesh, and those small veins which are connected to other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the ventozator not to proceed with excessive scarification, because the location is stripped of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventozation with which one is ventozated on the ashosses and converges with hemorrhoids of the rectum and ulcers below.
And it is necessary to command the ventozator to be a great ventozation, and of earth, because the location requires strong section; and the thin ventozas are pierced and scarified with scarification.
But the ventozations of the knees are very subtle and manifestly so, because they attract blood from all over the body, and converge with ancient pains of the throat and lungs, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and converge with bothor and ademil; and they are located at the site of bleeding from two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and two cavities.
However, they make the entire body tremble and cause syncope in many men.
And the significance of the alahorcoben ventozations is proportional to the significance of the ventozations on both knees.
And the quality of the position of the ventozations is that one pauses the ventozation at first glance and sucks it in with a gentle suction, and does not prolong the position of the ventozations, but rather pauses them slightly and remains them quietly, allowing the humors to come to the location by gradual arrival. And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the location already redden and inflate, and that the rigor of blood appears.
And then you should scarify and iterate the suction gradually, and approximately consider the disposition of the body.
Because that person who has tender skin and few pores, you should only scarify him once and not again, so that the location is not ulcerated.
And command the ventozator to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and then apply the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scarify twice, because in the first instance, the way of subtlety is opened up for the blood and its quality is improved. But in the second [incision], one must seek out the acquired knowledge of the extraction of thickened blood.
And if the blood is very foul-smelling, then it is necessary to make a third scarification so that it can be finally cleared.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one scarification is sufficient.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we must scarify with a lot of scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify by making a deep incision.
And the term of scarification in which lies the depth of the coding so only.
And if the one whose code is thick, hard, and black, and his pores are tight, it is necessary that the locations of the ventoses be anointed with gentle, open, and resolving oils; if it is in the summer, like oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of amellas dossas, or oil of cemensa de coja; and if it is in the winter, then one must use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is great, then one must prepare it with oil of marantic, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloen, or oil of anethi, and to those similar.
But if the ventozator is of wide pores and tender skin, it is necessary that it be forbidden to use oil, and it is necessary that the locations of the ventozas, near to the ventozation, be washed with icy water or cold water from a spring, or cold water from a well, or cold water from a river, and similar to those.
And that person whose blood is of great humidity, washes his ventozas with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And that person whose superfluities are great, washes his ventozas with ancient vinegar, or water of sansuc (majorama), or decoction of aneth, or of camomile, and similar to those.
And it is necessary that the ventozation be kept before bath; having to be administered in proportion to the bath for one hour or two, and to sleep after the ventozation.
What is it that ought to be regulated before ventosation, namely the sand of the winds or the blood-letting instrument.
It is necessary to consider at first: if the ventozator or one who should be bleeding is choleric and vents over his blood being hot and inflamed, then it is necessary that he take cooling causes, such as vinegar of milligranas, and endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and similar to those.
And pause from their foods such as pullets, and meats of hawks serving, and foods conditioned with vinegar, and similar to those.
And for that person whose complexion is hot, it is necessary that he drink essence of almiva or essence of alsecanabin from semensas, and sumac, and a strong-smelling mixture between yew and holly; and that he be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and refrain from eating the foods of pullets and canabir and pheasants and small birds and doves.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventozation and blood-letting, drink should be greater than food.
And it is necessary that it be given to drink in some hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musc, as muscadine, or alcelita before the ventozation or before blood-letting, or nearby, so that the main members may be comforted and that the blood may be subtletized; and it is not necessary for them to take those scalding things.
But the ventozas that are suitable for scarification are those that are paused over the liver, and on the hip and podagra, and on the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the pubic region, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those [ventozas] but rather attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing a ventosa over the nipple in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and using that to dissolve ventosity cold and viscous from the member, just as one pauses on the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and cools it down and removes the pain which resolves ventosity.
And it is paused over the tonsils when they become obstructed or swollen, because by virtue of attraction, a strong and light [action] opens up obstruction and eradicates the swelling from its place.
And similarly, it does when paused over the liver and gallbladder, as ventosity is released in those enclosed.
And these ventozas are administered slowly with suction, and some times they are administered with heat.
And some times they are administered full of hot water in the illnesses of the gallbladder.
And thus it is that the ventozas are filled and made greater, as it is with hot water alone or with water in which certain herbs have been steeped according to their convenience.
Form of ventozas administered with heat: the diameter of the orifice should be about two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be half a palm; and it should be in the left side, in the location that is in the circuit, one quarter of the whole, the channel being small according to the quantity that an awl can enter.
It is made of earthenware or citrus, with thick margins, lion-like and evenly distributed, for the purpose that it does not impede the member from taking its position on top.
And it should have a middle part of earthenware or iron, where a cross-shaped candle is placed with the heat.
And this ventozas is greater in size than the one we have recommended; and the small addition to it, according to the illnesses and state of the person who uses it.
And the ventosas of the old and exhausted are different from those of the young and robust.
And the quality of placing this ventozas with heat on the member is that it extends the ember with decent wood, gradually in front of a small candle made of wax, and places it on the middle of the cross-shaped part in the middle location of the ventozas, so that the fire may be lit around the left side, so that it does not burn the patient's body.
And it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the said [ember] should be placed on the channel that we have mentioned, until when we have the ventozas and do not need to open the said [channel] and allow the vapor to rise over that channel, then the ventozas will soon dissolve.
And properly ignite the ember according to its manner, and iterate it if you need it.
But in ventosa that is administered for the illness of pleurisy, with water, where there is no cross-shaped part nor channel, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
And this is its form: And this ventozas the more it is large, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Captulo XCIV.
Sanguissuguas are not administered on small members, but on those in which it is not possible to place ventosas, due to their smallness, such as the palate and gingiva, and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the tongue and nose, and similar to them.
And the quality of using those that you have found sanguisugas which are in the waters of purest poverty.
And accordingly, let the day and night be spent in water purification until they are famished, and that there be no cause remaining in the belly of those [sanguisugas]; and accordingly, let the body be evacuated by blood-letting and ventozas; and accordingly, let the member of the patient be fregued until it becomes red; and accordingly, let them be placed on top.
And when they are filled and coagulated.
And if it is possible to suction the place with a ventozas, it is more beneficial in judgment.
And otherwise, let the place be washed with vinegar and water, and then be rubbed and expressed.
And if the blood is prolonged in the body near the confluence of the sanguisuguas, and it flows out, then you should immerse a cloth in cold water, and place that on top until the discharge has stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied, then you should powder vitriol, or guallas and similar substances to them of stiptical causes, on top until the blood is absorbed; or let the most abundant fava beans be placed on the spot, and left there until they stick to the place, and the blood is absorbed.
And it is necessary, if needed, iteration of sanguisuguas, when it is possible to change those.
And if the sanguisuguas are prohibited from suspension, then you should rub the place with recent blood or leave an awl in the area until blood flows; and accordingly, let them be placed, for those which feel any blood soon become attached.
And when they fall out, powder a little bit of alum, or salt, or ash, on them, and then cauterize.
And so begins the process of the third part: restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in bones.
Oh, son, understand that foolish doctors and ordinary people and those who do not look at the books of the Ancients for a long time, nor read one letter from them.
And because of this reason, it is made that the manner of the sages on earth is private; and you, oh son, do not forget to keep in mind that I have forgotten nothing from my studies over a long period of time; and I have not added anything new, but rather through the length of my reading of the books of the Ancients and study of their understanding, I have extracted the science from them.
And accordingly, I have directed my attention to experimentation and study throughout the length of my own life.
And you have already been described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which I have passed the best experiment; therefore, I have abridged it for you others and delivered it from occupation of elongation; and I have abridged it at the end of abridgment; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is made by addition of declaration, just like I did in two previous chapters.
Captulo Primero.
Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from which a preliminary statement is necessary, before we begin to recall the members of fractures and diverse ones of each. Therefore, let us now say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters according to the understanding of which in the beginning the craftsmen are forced to stand still upon the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others of yours.
And therefore I say that when accidents occur to any fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling, then it is necessary that you take care at the beginning with blood-letting or binding it up, or some other remedy, if there is no prohibitive cause, such as debility of virtue, or whether it be the one who has fallen, or old in decrepitude, or when it is time for vehement heat, or for vehement cold.
And accordingly, be content with your own food of fresh herbs and birds' flesh and crab meat; and prohibit thick meats and fill up only with viands and all viand that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of avoiding apoplectic caution, and if not, fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to his original regimen, with which he is accustomed to live.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods of great and heavy substance, with viscosity, such as bread cooked in water, rice, caps, peas, beef, and fresh vegetables, and thick and similar foods to those, and under this regimen, coagulation of fracture occurs more easily and kindly.
And know that the bones are brittle when they are in old men who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature because of the drying up of the members of theirs.
But nature adjusts and connects on the broken bone of all parts some similar cause to glue in which growth is thickened that adheres and strengthens it until it is conglutinated and tied together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, just like fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, because a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
And you will find in recollection of all the species of fracture, exposed in its own chapter distinct from others.
A great diversity of fracture in itself. And the species of fracture of bone are diversified in their own kind; for there is curved fracture and another that occurs at the stars; and some times there is fracture according to the length of the bone: and so are the fractures of the satagia and astelhas and addictions proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and there is fracture fissure small.
And for all species, there is a proper way or torment in its restoration, according to the distinct memory of it in its own places.
A great sign of bone fracture. And thus it is known that bone fracture exists: there is twisting of the limb, and that elevation and prominence of the limb to the sense, and thus when you compress that with your mother's hands.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the location nor is it made of a deviation, and you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
It is possible that there is twisting or small fissure, and then you should not press too hard with your mother's hands and with compression from all sides. Having pause over the location of medicines which bring remembrance of those things fitting for that moment to which they are suitable; and be strict by subtle structure.
And know that the location when it is curved and not split into two or another which does not occur in the satagia, as is remade all part of its comparison, then you should begin from your hour to rectification having that to happen apoplectic caution.
And if apoplectic caution occurs to it, then you should leave that alone for some days until the apoplectic caution ceases; and as soon as it ceases, apply something else according to each manner by which you can lift and guide.
And know that restoration of it and setting of it is more easy than the bone in which satagie occurs.
And as soon as possible, strengthen it according to what will come to mind.
But if in the bone there are satagias, then it is necessary to extend this broken member by two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your mother's hands if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And be your position such that you pause the member at the location where it is naturally extended, while the parts are stretched out of the broken member, then you must force yourself to make those additions return to their places with gentle and according to each manner by which you can in their places.
And take care that according to your strength you do not occur over the patient because of your operation or injury; and force yourself according to your power that you apply one bone to another, their companion, according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that in that hour you touch with your mother's hands, and if times there is some different cause, correct that and guide that by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish surgeons who many times cause apoplectic caution by their operation, or cause contraction in the member, just as we have seen for the operation of theirs.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; for you know that the broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and form.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and hand and foot, it is necessary that the envelopment be with a cloth very soft and subtle.
But those that are large, such as the chest or thigh, it is necessary that in those there be a wrapping of cloth broad and hard, for the broad wrapping connects the great member and strengthens all parts with equal structure, so that in it no stain enters.
And accordingly, when you begin, start your equalization process, and pause conveniently at that point, over the location of that fracture with three or four envelopments according to what the member requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the bond.
And accordingly, see to it that the wrapping reaches as far as the superior part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen more than not, so that your structure does not fail with the which you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And accordingly, stretch yourself with the envelopment of the location of the fracture a little, and soften the structure gradually, until you take from the location a great part.
And accordingly, take another bandage and wrap it around the location of the fracture with envelopment, and accordingly see to it that the wrappings reach as far as the part left of the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we have said above.
And accordingly, pause between the wrappings of stopper or cloth with which the twisting of the fracture is equalized, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not pause at all.
And accordingly, pause over the other bandage, and accordingly, equalize on these star-shaped wrappings as well-made as they are, if there is no inflammation or apoplectic caution in the location, and then pause over that which seats the apoplectic caution and prevents the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you should strengthen over the stars.
And the stars should be made of the best cane reed, and be formed wisely; or of palm tree wood; or of sedge palm leaves; and the width of each star should be according to this form and figure:
And it is necessary that the star-shaped wrapping that is paused over that fracture be larger and thicker by a little than the other star-shaped wrappings, and the length of the star should be according to what is measured by the member in magnitude and smallness; and accordingly, strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first structure; and accordingly, tie above with a faithful decentment according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture more, and as much as it extends from the fracture, so much less is the structure.
And it is necessary that the threads be gentle in thickness and subtlety, and be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of certain foolish people who pause their threads with cords of twisted silk, and it is a great error, when one takes the structure out of equality.
And accordingly, fine threads are not convenient, for you will not consecrate by structure with those as you wish, and it is not necessary that between star-shaped wrapping and star-shaped wrapping there be more than one finger's breadth.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars near the structure in their places, then pause behind those with a stopper made of lion's mane or woolen yarn until this does not cause him injury.
Some times fractures are accompanied by a wound, and disruption occurs in the bone code, and you will come to remembrance of that in the capital according to singularity.
And know that not all broken members are set with stars on the first day; the reason is that the member, when it is large, does not need to be paused over by stars for seven days or more, according to your safety in the advent of apoplectic caution.
And this is the method of the emplasters with which the Ancients restored, those that are paused over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of emplastering like a gentle breeze of restoration for fracture, suitable for many complexions and especially for women and children, because it is from there that no wind blows nor does it freeze: and it is that you take the powder of millstone, and it is the pulp of the flour that results from the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill.
And comforts that one as it is, but not in the same way that you sift it with album of wheat, and pause the making of it not too dense or subtle; and accordingly use it.
Another method of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: recipe of assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and mugwort, which is the root of sage, one dragon's weight; myrrh and aloes, one dragon's weight five; alochil, twenty dragon's weights; all are mixed together with aloe water or album of hen, if the patient's complexion is scarred; and then use this plaster, because it has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to men.
Another method of plaster which gives strength to fractures and torsion: recipe of mugwort and white aloes, one dragon's weight ten; myrrh and aloes, one dragon's weight five; acacia, six dragon's weights; Armenian bole, twenty dragon's weights.
The final instructions in our medieval medicine recipe!
Another method of emplastering!
The final passage in this medieval medical text!
Another method of emplastering!
A concise method of emplastering! The final instructions!
The final instruction!
Another method of emplastering!
The final passage!
The final passage!
Another method of emplastering!
The final passage! The final instruction!
The final instructions!
The final instruction!
The final passage!
The final instruction! The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final passage!
The final passage!
A new chapter in the medieval medical text!
It seems like we're diving into the specifics of head fractures!
Another interesting passage!
More insight into the types of head fractures!
Another fascinating passage!
Another passage that's giving me some serious medieval medical vibes!
The final sentence of the passage!
The final sentence of the text! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence of the text!
The final passage of the text!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The first of the two methods of operation!
The second of the two methods of operation!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final passage!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The second method of operation!
The final passage!
The final passage!
The final passage!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final passage!
The final passage!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
We've reached the end of the text!
A new topic!
Fascinating!
A medieval medical procedure! A warning!
A detailed description!
A general guideline!
A treatment plan!
A creative solution!
A creative fix!
A surprising twist!
The final word!
A final caution!
A final piece of advice!
The final advice!
The final sentence!
A new chapter!
A new topic!
A nuanced approach!
A clever technique!
A delicate procedure!
A delicate procedure!
The final advice!
The final act!
The final act!
The final caution!
The final consideration!
The final consideration!
The final step!
A new chapter!
A new topic!
A new development!
The nuances of fracture classification!
The surgical procedure!
The final step!
The final touches!
The final challenge!
The final touches!
The delicate touch!
The surgical tool!
The shape of the instrument!
The length of the instrument!
The aftermath of the procedure!
The gentle approach!
The treatment of infection!
The importance of frequent checks!
The importance of proper sleeping posture!
The timing of removing the splint!
The importance of dressing changes!
The timeline for healing!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
The title of the manuscript!
The conclusion of the manuscript!
The importance of gentle manipulation!
The application of dressings and splints!
The shaping of the splint!
The importance of proper splinting and immobilization!
The importance of regular dressing changes and splint adjustments!
The final instructions!
The timeline for recovery!
The final stages of treatment!
The final steps of treatment!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
A new topic!
The complexity of foot fractures!
The painful and distressing symptoms of foot fractures!
The art of gentle manipulation!
The art of gentle wrapping and securing!
The art of gentle correction!
It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
A new topic!
The anatomy of broken ribs! The importance of careful observation!
The importance of gentle treatment!
The complications of broken ribs!
The ancient wisdom of the Antics!
The ancient wisdom of the Antics!
The importance of caution!
The dangers of overconfidence!
The art of gentle wrapping!
The importance of careful observation!
The art of wound care!
The treatment of abscesses!
The importance of rest!
The final chapter!
The treatment of fractures in the spine!
The complexity of spinal fractures! The importance of careful observation and diagnosis!
The signs of recovery!
The importance of careful observation!
The gravity of the situation!
The power of gentle treatment!
The treatment of abscesses!
The importance of rest and relaxation!
The treatment of bone fractures!
The treatment of complex fractures!
The importance of proper wound care!
The final chapter!
The treatment of hernias!
The anatomy of hernias!
The treatment of hernias!
The correction of hernias!
The preparation for hernia correction! The application of dressings and splints!
The application of splints and the importance of proper rest!
The treatment of abscesses!
The treatment of broken bones!
The final chapter!
The treatment of fractures!
The adjutori!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The application of splints!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The treatment of fractured adjutori!
The application of splints!
The treatment of abscesses!
The application of pressure!
The application of pressure to the adjutori!
The use of splints!
The use of splints!
The application of pressure!
The importance of proper application! The relationship between fracture length and strictura application!
The final steps!
The importance of patience!
The importance of proper bandaging!
The importance of patience!
The position of the patient!
The importance of proper positioning and support!
The importance of proper nutrition and hydration!
The importance of gradual strengthening and rehabilitation!
The importance of patience and cautious rehabilitation!
It seems that we have reached the end of the text!
The title of the next chapter!
Anatomy of the arm!
Fractures in the arm!
Treatment of a fracture in the small focus (focil petit)!
Treatment of a fracture in the larger focus (focil major)!
The worst-case scenario: when both bones are broken at the same time!
The importance of proper treatment and alignment!
The importance of proper alignment and pressure!
The importance of strong immobilization!
The importance of proper positioning and support!
The importance of proper support and comfort!
The importance of proper positioning and support!
The importance of proper alignment and reduction!
The importance of gentle pressure and patience!
The importance of gentle pressure and patience when dealing with sharp edges or spurs!
The importance of addressing wounds and infections in fracture treatment!
The importance of proper wound care and treatment!
The importance of understanding the types and numbers of splints used in arm fractures!
The importance of proper splinting and alignment!
The importance of gentle and moist wrapping!
The importance of careful consideration and observation! The importance of prompt intervention and cooling!
The importance of gentle handling and reapplication!
The importance of careful evaluation and correction!
The importance of nutrition and circulation!
The importance of not rushing the healing process!
The importance of gentle movement and rest!
The importance of understanding the healing process!
The conclusion!
The final topic: restoration of fracture of the little finger and its digits!
The importance of gentle handling!
The importance of proper positioning!
The importance of proper alignment and reduction!
The importance of proper splinting and wrapping!
The importance of proper wrapping and compression!
The importance of proper application and pressure!
The importance of proper splinting and alignment!
The importance of proper alignment and elevation!
The importance of proper alignment and fixation!
The importance of considering various scenarios!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The importance of proper alignment and positioning!
The importance of proper positioning and support!
The importance of proper alignment and extension!
The importance of proper alignment and extension (contd.)!
The importance of proper alignment and extension (contd.)!
The importance of proper alignment and reduction! The importance of proper wound care!
The importance of proper bandaging and wrapping!
The importance of proper wrapping and positioning!
The importance of proper positioning and support!
The importance of proper padding and compression!
The importance of proper splinting and compression!
The importance of proper extension and strengthening!
The importance of proper care and attention!
The importance of proper alignment and correction!
The importance of proper alignment and adjustment!
The importance of proper rehabilitation and physical therapy!
The importance of proper healing time and consideration!
The final chapter!
The restoration of fractures in the hip joint!
The importance of early treatment for hip fractures!
The importance of proper diagnosis and treatment!
The process of restoring the hip joint!
The use of splints and bandages!
The importance of considering all possible scenarios!
The final chapter!
The restoration of fractures in the femur!
The anatomy of the femur!
The treatment of fractures in the femur!
The consequences of misaligned bones!
The importance of proper alignment!
The importance of proper alignment!
The importance of proper alignment and stability!
The importance of gentle and gradual rehabilitation!
The process of surgical intervention!
The wrapping process!
The placement of splints!
The use of a splint to prevent movement!
The importance of prompt treatment!
The importance of regular monitoring and treatment!
The final chapter!
The fracture of the ankle and foot bones!
The likelihood of fractures in the ankle and foot bones!
The treatment of foot bone fractures!
The process of realigning and stabilizing the foot bones!
The application of an emplastre and the placement of two small plates!
The importance of proper wrapping and stabilization!
The importance of monitoring and re-evaluating the injury!
The process of treating and re-attaching digits! The process of re-attaching and stabilizing a detached digit!
The process of re-attaching and stabilizing multiple detached digits!
The importance of considering all possible causes and factors!
The final chapter!
The fracture of the hip joint!
The process of treating a fractured hip joint!
The process of treating a fractured hip joint (continued)!
The process of treating a fractured hip joint (continued)!
The duration of treatment!
The use of an ovela sac and a reed tube to treat a fractured hip joint!
The treatment process concludes!
The conclusion of the text!
The conclusion of the text!
The treatment of a fractured spine in men!
The final chapter!
The treatment of fractures with wounds!
The importance of considering the complexity of the fracture and wound!
The importance of controlling bleeding and promoting clotting!
The importance of prompt treatment and prevention of complications!
The importance of caution when dealing with abscesses!
The importance of reducing and realigning a fractured bone!
The use of a metal instrument for reducing and realigning fractures!
The importance of precision and gentle manipulation when using the metal instrument!
The importance of careful attention to the shape and curvature of the bone!
The conclusion!
The translation of the title!
The importance of proper positioning!
The process of realignment and stabilization!
The importance of carefully aligning the fractured bone!
The importance of flexibility and adaptability in reducing fractures!
The importance of careful attention to small details!
The importance of monitoring the patient's condition after reduction!
The importance of proper wound care and dressing!
The importance of proper wound closure and dressing!
The importance of careful caution to avoid causing further harm! The characteristics of a minor fracture!
The importance of proper wound care and dressing!
The importance of monitoring wound healing and administering medication!
The importance of monitoring wound healing and ensuring proper consolidation!
The importance of monitoring wound healing and addressing concerns! The importance of carefully removing and extracting foreign objects!
The importance of addressing wound complications!
The importance of proper surgical technique and caution! The importance of proper wound care!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
A new chapter!
The importance of treating swelling after a fracture!
The treatment of swelling after a fracture!
The importance of carefully managing swelling after a fracture!
The importance of addressing severe swelling after a fracture!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The importance of restoring a fractured bone to its natural state!
The importance of addressing various factors that can impede the restoration of a fractured bone!
The importance of nutrition and relaxation in the healing process!
The importance of proper wound care and nutrition in promoting healing!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The importance of proper care for broken bones!
The importance of proper care for a restored limb!
The consequences of poor medical care!
The use of herbal remedies and poultices to treat swelling and bruising!
The importance of gentle massage and movement in physical therapy!
The importance of careful consideration and planning in surgical procedures!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It seems we've reached a new topic!
The consequences of dislocation!
The importance of prompt reduction in the case of a dislocation!
The importance of prompt action in reducing dislocation!
The importance of gentle and careful manipulation in reducing dislocation!
The importance of thorough care for the affected limb!
The conclusion of the text!
It seems that we're reaching the final chapter!
The final chapter!
The final chapter is wrapping up!
The final conclusion!
The importance of prompt reduction in the case of a complete dislocation!
The final instructions!
The importance of gentle manipulation and evaporation!
The final steps!
The final instructions!
The final emphasis on gentle care!
The consequences of failed reduction!
The dire consequences of failed reduction!
The final chapter!
The final chapter!
The furcula and its attachments!
The final steps of treatment! The final step in treatment!
The final touch!
The conclusion!
The final advice!
The final touch!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The three ways of muscle dislocation!
The second way of muscle dislocation!
The tendency of muscle dislocation!
The consequences of muscle dislocation!
The final advice!
The final revelation!
The final warning!
The key to successful treatment!
The final steps of treatment!
The treatment continues!
The final steps of treatment!
The art of muscle reduction! The importance of gentle treatment!
The art of gentle reduction!
The art of gentle reduction!
The art of gentle reduction!
The art of gentle reduction!
The art of gentle reduction!
The final steps of treatment!
The importance of gentle treatment!
The power of gentle exercise!
The treatment of dislocated joints!
The consequences of neglect!
The reduction of a dislocated joint!
The administration of another stricture!
The use of baths to alleviate gravity and promote natural movement!
The next chapter in our medieval medical text!
The treatment of a dislocated joint in the hip!
The complexity of hip joint dislocation!
The importance of prompt reduction and treatment!
The process of restoring a dislocated hip joint!
The process of reducing a anterior hip joint dislocation!
The use of forceful extension to reduce a stubborn dislocation!
The use of two assistants to apply forceful extension!
The wrapping of the arm with cloth!
The use of oil to facilitate joint movement!
The post-reduction care and treatment!
The removal of the bandage and support!
The use of repeated applications and extension!
The use of gentle massage and compression to alleviate discomfort! The use of gentle heat and massage to promote recovery! Corruption has already occurred on the inside of the wound, up to the point where it is linen-covered.
The use of a cow's hide to promote healing!
A new chapter!
The treatment of a wrist dislocation!
The importance of prompt reduction in wrist dislocations!
The process of reducing a wrist dislocation!
Additional considerations for wrist dislocation reduction!
The importance of patience and gentle treatment!
The importance of considering the wrist's natural anatomy!
The post-treatment care for wrist dislocation!
The treatment of wrist dislocation-related stiffness!
A new chapter!
The treatment of finger dislocations!
The frequency of finger dislocations!
The reduction of finger dislocations!
The post-reduction care for finger dislocations!
The importance of gradual extension!
The importance of consistent treatment and exercise!
The treatment of wrist dislocations!
The importance of consistent treatment across different areas!
The final chapter!
The treatment of dislocations in the neck!
The gravity of a neck or spine dislocation!
The consequences of a severe neck or spine dislocation!
The consequences of a severe neck or spine dislocation: gelbozitation!
The treatment of gelbozitation: a dire prognosis!
The conclusion: a summary of the treatment methods!
The only hope for recovery!
The patient's position: lying down to facilitate healing!
The use of props to facilitate healing!
The use of props to maintain proper alignment!
The use of straps to secure the patient's body!
The importance of securing the straps firmly!
The use of force and pressure to realign the spine!
The use of a table to realign the spine! The use of the table to apply gentle pressure!
The preparation of the bed for the patient!
The placement of the supporting stick!
The shape of the supporting sticks!
The securing of the straps!
The final steps in the treatment!
The application of the poultice!
The conclusion!
The final warning and recommendation!
The warning against improper treatment!
We're moving on to a new chapter!
A new chapter on treating a dislocated hip!
The importance of understanding the anatomy!
The different types of hip joint dislocations!
The most common type of hip joint dislocation!
The signs of a posterior hip joint dislocation!
The signs of an anterior hip joint dislocation!
The signs of an anterior hip joint dislocation!
The signs of a posterior hip joint dislocation!
The importance of considering the duration and severity of a dislocation!
The treatment of recent dislocations!
The treatment of stubborn dislocations!
The extension of the affected leg!
The extension of all these into one moment!
The common extension!
The importance of proper treatment!
The reduction of the dislocation!
The second strong minister!
The ease of this type of treatment!
The importance of patient cooperation!
The measurement and extension of the affected leg!
The suspension and length measurement of the affected leg!
The use of young men to manipulate the pelvis and hip joint!
The reduction of the dislocation in the outer direction!
The use of two beams and a wet cloth to prevent discomfort!
The final stages of the reduction!
The treatment of anterior dislocations!
The treatment of posterior dislocations!
The application of compression!
The final stages of the reduction!
The final check-up!
The final confirmation!
The aftercare!
The final recovery instructions!
The final chapter!
The chapter on the cure of dislocation of the ankle!
The ankle is dislocated in three ways!
The sign of ankle dislocation!
The restoration of ankle dislocation!
The sign of reduction!
The final steps!
The final instructions!
The exception!
The final chapter!
The chapter on the cure of dislocation of the ankle!
The ankle's complexities!
The sign of ankle dislocation!
The cure for ankle dislocation!
The treatment for significant ankle dislocations!
The correct positioning of the assistant!
The reduction technique!
The final step!
The final push!
The importance of confirmation!
The importance of caution!
The importance of external support!
The importance of careful alignment!
The final stages of reduction!
The importance of gentle handling!
The importance of rest and gentle manipulation!
The importance of gradual recovery! The importance of patience and proper recovery!
The importance of proper wound care!
The final chapter!
The chapter on curing dislocations of the little toes!
The importance of gentle manipulation!
The importance of proper positioning!
The importance of gentle manipulation!
The importance of immobilization and rest!
The final chapter!
The types of dislocations!
The importance of timely treatment!
The importance of humility and compassion! The importance of prompt treatment!
The importance of proper wound care!
The importance of treating compound fractures!
The importance of humility and devotion! The final sentence! The classic Christian blessing!
