Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequence, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you complete it at your own pace in this treatise, which is a part of the operation with my hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with my hand is spread throughout our region and in our time of total privacy, until they strongly perceive the science of it, and its vigilance is established; and no one remained of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the hands and endeavor to correct those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and the art.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this order of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come into possession of the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as it is for addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no artificial expert is found in our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and it covers the actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen discovered until he knew the juvenation of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and he had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of them, and their size; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their issuance.
And for that Hippocrates said that a name is a word, mostly in small works, and greatly in the art of medicine.
We have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from error, for which they will be mortally wounded, thus you have seen many of them, because few are formed in this science and get away from it with their experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has inadvertently induced an scrophilous abscess in the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great bleeding occurs until the woman almost dies between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who pretended that he would remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and performed a trephine operation on the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called him a destroyer of that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, he would know that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he ended up with a black crust that was on the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he destroyed the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and astellas in strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dislocated according to his own desires, and then he relieved, and then he left it for several days and commanded that we should not touch the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot became apostematous, and he came to ruin.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and he was unable to dislocate the limb, and consequently it was tranquilized and thus he was free from his pains.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that he could not restrain it, and he did not cease to walk with the corruption in the limb until the patient became worse.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and he ulcerated it for several days, until the malice of it was magnified in his lord's sight.
The cause is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him with iron of all, but rather it was in a member which suffered from all, as if it had been held.
And for that, sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with my hand is divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there is danger in major dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where you found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And so take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are abolished and confirmed.
And you will be on the best way for the grace of God, persevering in salvation and laudable success, and you will leave the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you will put away your arms from that which makes you fear, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you may not be evasive: because more remains to your glory, and afterwards in the world and finally to your sanctities.
Because there are many useless medicines: There is no medicine for evil, because bad doctors are not named.
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first partition. The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the preparations of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second partition. The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on poultices, and on the extraction of arrows and on similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisted limbs and similarities to those; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complexions it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cautery and its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant, and I need a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation.
And therefore I say that cautery confers on the whole universal complexion, which is either material or non-material, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without material.
In the cold and dry complexions there is discord; for some said that cautery is juice against that, and others said the contrary, that cautery is not convenient in evil complexions which are by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that evil cold and dry complexions are healed by cautery which is hot and dry.
And I say to him who says the contrary, that by cautery it is made juice in all evil cold and dry complexions that are found in men's bodies, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
And I say through the sermon of that, that I have experimented and already discovered many times.
Moreover, I do not know that someone has written about that which is already experienced and exercised in the chapter on cautery through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of complexions in men's bodies and the disposition of evils in their metesises, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Moreover, in the other complexions, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid evils, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree on the juice with cautery in those.
And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its goodness, so on cautery as combined medicine, is because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is a small nuisance.
Moreover, the action of combined medicine penetrates to that in the members which are afflicted by it, and strongly makes them come into the difficult-to-heal member and strongly helps them.
Moreover, fire, by its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not make anything except that it overflows; and it is already known to us through experiment and long service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for this I have excused the length of the sermon; and if it were not that I do not read my own book in this passage to you, secretly hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion through which it expels evils, a philosophical demonstration sermon, which will be acute in your pious pages.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to use cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the nuisance from the accidental time is submerged in the juice of that which is attracted by cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fast, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared for those that bring evil, which is greater than small nuisance entering for a short time.
And thus I do not catch in your pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that evil which is healed by cautery, it does not return at all times, and pauses that consequence.
And the cause is not so, because they do not understand that cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are causes for why pains come.
More masters excel in superficial medicine for the will to validate their worth and virtue of their operation and greatness of their lord's sense.
It is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, and its virtue, and what has been prepared in their body by the aggregation of superfluous fluids, and what they have acquired through their habits and similarities with those causes; but that the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in few superfluous and humid parts, thus as if cauterization is done for toothache and similar to that, it is possible that the pain does not return there, more so it happens in small children.
And the common speech is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not to what they understand in it, because they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine nor another cause that profits from cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not but when we administer various methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause we administer thus cauterization, and it profits from that. And henceforth I say that cauterization is not the last resort of medicine, but according to the intention which understands the common people and many foolish doctors.
And they said that gold cauteries are better than iron cauteries, and they did not say so except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a scar, as if it is not absolutely virtuous, because you have already practiced and experienced that it does not do so except in certain bodies among others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; but more masters when you make cauterization with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepare to receive freshness; and if you adjust on top of the ignition, the gold makes a focus for the fire, and in the fire some laminas are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
And therefore it is done to make cauterization with iron, we do not push lightly and do not approach closely to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can lift the demanding part that wants it from them.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and eyebrows fluent, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate in medicine laxative the whole mind, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and their custom.
And then command him to shave his whole head with a razor, and then do so that he sits between his thighs on a heated bench and places his hands over his feet.
And then place the razor of your palm then put your fingers on the razor at the bridge of the nose between the eyebrows. More masters, since the finger said of my own place is arrived, signifying that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cauterization of which this is the form:
And then place that on the sensitive place with a probe, in a way that descends, at which the finger of the hand is constricted little by little, and you turn that around.
And then lift your hand lightly and regard the place, and if you see that some quantity of the head is discovered, thus as the quantity of grains of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to your hand in that iron, in another of that, if it is inflamed, until it is seen by the eye what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that over the place and leave that for three days.
And then place it on the sewn wound in a bandage and leave that on until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with four-part medicine until it is healed.
And they said that when the Roman plague breaks out, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more youthful.
And they said that some of them who are cauterized on the back of the eye, and hold the cautery until it is adhered to some part of the spectacle of the eye.
And it is necessary to adjust what adheres to the bone, and it is necessary to cure.
There are others who apply the cautery to the rear, until it penetrates into the bone strongly, so that the bone is seized, and this is the method of small abscesses. And they believe that from that place exudes the vapors of the head.
And it has been held in the open wound for a long time, and it is necessary to cure until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries in total, unless in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you should tell me, it is better for my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first kind of cautery is most safe and better for me; and from that house and I do that work for my health.
Following chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When the entire head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of gerras and cochias and capipurges and emplaustres and guatz and cadels and gualinas and semblantz, and mainly if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not alleviate any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and atrophied from great cold, then that cauterying is another kind of cautery beneath that one. And it is necessary to cautery above the horn of the dry head with a cautery until the cord is divided. Incise the cord and discover the bone with the quantity that we have recounted and cautery it with a cautery in the rear part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is paused. And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers from great diverse pain, unlike the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the method of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [humors].
When there is pain in the head, or it is extended to the vein, then evacuate with medicines that mundify the head, and another cure should be administered, which you have described in the divisions of illnesses; and if all does not alleviate, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
A cauterying with acute burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape it and bind the extremities of it to both ends of the heads. And it is necessary to incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the bone beneath the cord, until it is hidden.
And it is necessary to apply pressure above it with a stopped descent constriction, and let it be for three hours; and then dislodge it and draw out the alum, and let the wound be for two or three days, and then pause on the covered area submerged in water until the place makes a scab.
And it is necessary to cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, make those some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
A cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cautering of which this is the form.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
And it is necessary to pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath does not hurt — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is hurt by the specificity of the cord is as much as the size of it, and hold your hand so that the artery is not hurt beneath, so that there is no flux of blood.
And it is necessary to soak the area in salt water and pause it on the place, and let it be for three days; and then pause the area wrapped in bandage, and cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cautery the extremity of the cutaneous area according to cautery, and beware of incision of the artery in this non-ancient migrating [humors] properly.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of ancient migrating [humors].
When you treat an acute case that we have spoken of in the previous treatment, and what we have said about the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery in medicine or the cautery in focus, then it is necessary that you ignore the cautery cut into the skin so that it becomes white, since it indicates on the line of the long bone where the greatest pain is; and place your hand for a while and strengthen it until you reach the artery and penetrate to the bone.
It is necessary for you to take care of the continuity of the jawbone, which is essential for chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged in a way that would hinder its function.
And it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is affected, because in its affection there is fear, and major attention to the one who ignores what it does and is not studied and experienced; and thus the operation begins on it at the commencement.
And you will find a reminder of the rule for the flow of blood in the affected artery according to its own manner, in the same place of this free book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient is tolerable, then cauterize it in the same place on the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the arteries with cautery having two horns, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more convenient.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with causal laxatives and other treatments which we have said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named punctured, of which this is the form.
And point the cautery to the ignition, and it is led to the environment of the whole ear in a circular motion, or in the circle of some points if the pain is in some. Gradually move the cautery along the root of the ear, little by little, until you reach the spot where you feel it.
And if you make points with the cautery all over the ear, and in this way, and then treat the spots until they are healthy.
Chapter 6.
On the cauterization of gout.
Gout which is treated and cauterized is not only of the species that come through fluxion, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It is necessary to cauterize the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of gout with herbs and purging and evacuations, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your hand on the cautery for the opposite part of the affected limb, because mollification is only effective in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, just above the horn of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the pain in the finger, and place your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specific code is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting instrument, the form of which is described in the table. Moreover, it is necessary to subtly understand that one should not be too confident; and it is necessary to cut into the excess fat a little.
And then treat the spot where it is described in the process until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When old apoplexy is treated and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery on the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more inferior; and then it is treated with what proceeds.
Chapter 8.
On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by fluxion.
It is necessary to give to the patient at the beginning large pills and servant mondificants.
And then take away the whole head of the patient and place it on the wooden board described in the treatise on emplasters.
Put aside those withered leaves, because that is a handle for the cautery. And do it according to the measure of the order which I have already said.
And then if the health of the patient is good; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then take care to make the cauteries in such a way that it is properly done.
But if you find the patient is tolerant, then make the cautery in a suitable place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Take care that it enters so that it heals; and let the olive-shaped cautery be made according to the form given above.
Chapter 9.
On cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
So that you proceed in mondification of the head with oils and with what we have said; and take away the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in a suitable place on the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those who are tolerant patients and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery so that it is combined with the code of the same, and raise the dead flesh. And take care that it enters so that it heals, and let this cautery be olive-shaped.
Chapter 10.
On cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not the epileptic who is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
And then it is necessary to mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and the other cure which we have described in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot take the medicines, then administer gentle and mild servings of mondifying service, beforehand for some days, with a good purification of the veins.
And take away the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in a suitable place on the head according to the preceding manner, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive-shaped cautery be according to what has been previously stated.
But if the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
On cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize it with the cauteries which we have said in the treatment of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him a purging drink that mondifies his brain according to what has been stated in the division.
And take away the patient's head, and then make a decent tortoise-shaped figure on the circle, and then place it in a suitable place on the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and hold him firmly from all parts.
And then apply a liniment; and it is also worthy of healing old wounds. And heat that over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when it is in him. And then put that in a suitable place on the head of the patient in the circle, and let it enter so that it is refreshed.
And do it so that the patient is in total remission for one week, with another regimen of his good into being healthy; or if you wish, cauterize it making small points according to the size of it, but keep your hand on a cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which humidifies the brain equally.
And then apply that cooked in a binding or in gray wrappers of wadding.
Chapter 12.
On cauterization of water descending into the whirl.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the whirl through the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what mondifies his head, and guard him from all humidity.
And that swelling should be treated in a bath for ten days.
And then command him to shave the head, and cauterize that same spot with a cautery; and then cauterize that same spot with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of inflammation in two veins, or one vein if it is the beginning of inflammation in one vein.
You should cautery all the veins and arteries that you find in the codena; and place the cauteries in that long area in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauteryzed; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or stop the same medicine, which is as much as possible.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the absence of those and caution against fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauteryzed at the neck, below two bones with two cauteries, immediately producing.
Chapter 13.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When the tears of the veins are old and accustomed and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head before, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauteryze that same spot with a cautery, which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of inflammation in the veins, and cauteryze in the same spot on the head and with two cauteries on the temples, and with two cauteries below two bones. And if you need to add more, then cauteryze that entire side of the vein on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the Cauterization of Foul Smell of the Nose.
When you medicate that same spot which we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to the patient three nights' sleep; and then shave his head, and cauteryze that same spot with a lesser cautery or an olive oil cautery. And then cauteryze that same spot with a clave cautery or with two cauteries on the two eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
And this is the form of the clave cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened by illness or humidity, then cauteryze that eyelid with a cautery and this cautery is lunar; and this is its form.
And if you wish, cauteryze that above the two eyebrows a small one with two cauteries in all parts, and thus elongate the temples. And thus is the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vein when the Skin is Converted to the Internal Parts and Punctures the Vein.
When the skin of the vein is converted to the internal parts and punctures the vein, cauteryze in that spot according to two manners, because the cautery is either with iron or with medicine combustible.
If you cauteryze with fire, command the patient to lie down on that spot which you have readied the skin, just as if it were those which are in the world, until they are prolonged and enlarged; and if you puncture that spot before its time, then strengthen the veins of the patient with a bandage so that it is not weakened until the skin is nourished.
Then when they are nourished and enlarged, then pause the head of the patient in the same place, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of the patient with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
And then pause with a cotton pad in an album of wool or in a mucilage of ptilli over the vein.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the form.
And then cauteryze on the figure which has been signaled, little by little, in soft touches, until the surface of the vein is burned, which is just like the leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
And the signal of the goodness of the work is that you see the eyelid of the vein already contracted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the vein.
And then elevate your hand and leave it like that for three days, and then pause on it with cotton cloth bound around it until the scar is eradicated. And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
When the skin returns to its natural color due to some cause and the eyelid is softened, then apply another time the cautery on that entire area as if you had done it for the first time.
But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that which has been elevated to its natural place and has been bent and the skin does not touch the vein.
But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin within so it is prolonged and bent, and then make a chart of fabric in the form of a leaf of myrtle.
And take some soap concoction and living water to anoint there. And apply it. Where the water is, and mix those causes well, and apply it to the fasting place so that it does not get cold; and apply it spread over the chart which was made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and put it on one vein of both arms; and put below the vein bent into an album of wool, and the head of the patient should be in a straight tie.
And put the finger on the medicine and press it a little and do not touch with the hand so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because the bite is in it as from fire.
And thus how you will perceive that the other bite, then release the medicine and touch it to the straight finger; thus how the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the vein with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as if washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is; and if not return on that of the medicine on the place where you have not impressed the medicine and do not deny until your operation is bent and the vein is constricted.
And then put on the outer skin to heal into order that the venom of the adjustment is eradicated, and then cure it with an ointment of definite finicon or another into order that it be healed.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation that you keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the vein, and if the eyelid for several days is softened and some cause of the skin touches the vein, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it inside to be healed.
And this is the form of myrtle leaf.
And you know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what was made your contraction.
And it will not be veiled the way of straight direction to that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the vein.
When you cure a fistula with water that we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it thus in this manner: command the patient to put their head straight in the tie, and hold the head of some minister between the ties more in such a way that it is neither veiled nor agitated at the tied head.
And then put outer skin on an album of wool or in a poultice of ptilli over the vein of it.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be conical, thus as it is a form of cane or of feather of vulture, from one extremity to the other where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as an awl.
But especially that which is burned is better at the tied work.
And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out its sap and dry it. And if it is not opened, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
And then put on the cautery which was well ignited, and you have that in a small part of the cautery of the vein at the partition of the nose, so that it does not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then put the cautery in the grooves of the vein and corrupt it.
And thus at the beginning of the vein cautery, you will see into the bone, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if it is necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then put on outer skin to heal and wrap it in an ointment exsiccated until it be healed.
But if they were passing eleven days and it is not healed, then put on the medicine acute corrosive until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
And it is another manner of cautery of fistula which the first doctors discovered: then in the place of the fistula and make a hole there and put on that fissure subtly as it is the form of it: They put in it the quantity of one ounce of lead melted; and you hold your hand well with good retention, and do not veiled the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the vein of it; and then put on the outer skin of the patient's vein enfused in an album of wool or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed in a way that we have spoken of regarding the cautery and treatment, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nose according to how it will be in its own location.
Chapter 18.
About the cauterization of the fracture of the toes.
Moth-like ulcers suddenly forming fissures on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures in the way that we have spoken of in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is described:
And it is the conquest of the patient according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then pause that initiated cut carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the root of the fissures.
And then heal that wounded area thoroughly until it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
About the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess forms and then breaks, and then it is ruptured, and then it is antiquated, and you correct the break and it is made into a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then you place that ignited thing in the traction of the fistula, and you hold it with your hand until it reaches the iron ignited at the root of it, and afterwards you make a scab or two; and then you heal that wounded area in the way that we have spoken of regarding the treatment until it is healthy.
And so if the wound is absolved and healed, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and extract the corrupted bone according to how it will be in its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
About the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and not with caution, then pause the head of the patient in the specified position, and ignite the cautery in the form that will be suitable, even so that you place the burnt point on the tooth and insert it into the gum, and hold your hand firmly until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you wish.
And then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop it, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is stiffened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
About the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or if the treatment with medicine does not confer, then cautery is used in two ways: either cautery with a hollow tube, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with a hollow tube is that you take a hollow tube of copper and boil it in hot iron, and then take a cotton thread and wrap it around the extremity of the tube, and then immerse it in the boiling tube, and pause it over the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled down.
And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the cotton thread or cloth in the aforementioned tube, and pause it over the painful tooth, and hold it over the ignited iron until the iron reaches the root of the conquered tooth.
However, beware of the cauterization with fire that you attend to the quantity of iron or copper, and it is in the core of some gross material and the acuity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will be suitable, and pause it over the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary to impress on the patient that they should rinse their mouth with good wine and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cautery is done in whatever way you wish to do it extremely, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter 22.
About the cauterization of crooked toes.
When crooked toes are caused by flux and cold humors and do not obey the direction through medicines and you wish to direct them lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this: having two hubertas (special tubes) per extremitat, so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the other extremitat, and pause the ignited thing over the abscess once, and another time if it is necessary for that, until it reaches the root of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and apply a dressing for three days and place it on the affected area until it is fully cleansed so that what the fire has consumed.
And then heal those who are wounded and bruised, and apply ointments until they are healthy.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of wounds of the foot and of constrictions of the ankle.
When moisture comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is complicated by coldness of completion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with medicines that are laxatives, and then cauterize those who have the root of the gout in the affected area.
And beware that you do not touch the cautery to the gout nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
And cauterize those who have another cautery at the joint of the neck in the posterior vertebrae of it. And let the cautery be shaped like a key according to the preceding method.
And then heal those who have what is previously mentioned until they are healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of lung diseases and of coughs.
When coughs and lung diseases are caused by cold moistures and the patient has no fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize those who have two cauteries on the forked part in the affected areas of the loins and hips; and another cautery in the middle part of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be shaped like a key according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pointing of pain of the ears.
And make points until it reaches those; and then heal those who have what is previously mentioned until they are healthy.
And now the cauteries have three ramps because the cauterization is like this: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of numbness that is at the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery moistures and does not stay in its place at the time of its return, until it is as it usually returns, and then by a small movement it is displaced thus that it ends, thus as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient will be reversed over the two hips or over the sides; and then elevate the code which is in the partition of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the upper parts.
And then ignite the cauteries that have two heads; and this is their form.
And then cauterize the code until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And some occasions are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause on the cauteries that are cooked in salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healthy.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and moisture enter the stomach to the point that it extracts its completion and is multiplied in it, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confuse them, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their arms extended and their legs, and then cauterize those who have three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger's length shaped like a key, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery is formed; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they will not putrefy.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two fingers' lengths of the thickness of the code.
And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, added thus. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized pointedly to one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize those who have a pointed cautery; and then heal those who have the cure that is previously mentioned until they are healthy.
Chapter 27.
On the cauterization of a feverish foot.
When the foot hurts from cold or dampness or thick windy humidity that disturbs its normal complete function and is cured by egress of superfluous fluid, and it does not comfort, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and we will apply three cauterizations according to this form and quantity measured over the foot, below the hip joint, where one perceives the decubitus of the same.
And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery in motion.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the meatus of the specillum of the codena, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their legs.
And it is possible that you can cauterialize these cauteries with a cuticular cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specillum of the entire codena be absorbed so that the entire body is absorbed and reaches into the intestines, because the codena here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel grave trouble and sharp pain.
And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and often the doctors are weary of its cure.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their back; and place a sign on the area of the abscess with a probe; and ignite the cauteries which are assembled like a rake, in the form of which I have described on the previous page. And cautelize with that instrument and cautery until the entire codena is burned, until it reaches the deep flesh, until there is no more sanity.
And then treat that by curing other abscesses until it is healthy.
And it is not fitting that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many maladies are recognized; however I have experimented with some gentle women who were bold about this operation, but I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for ulcers frequently follow this manner of being made, and it is this that you take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the thickness of the finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it at the fire, and then cautelize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining to the part that is below the beard, and make two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the knee, declining slightly to the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and make one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the codena in operation.
And thus I have described the ancient cauteries which are similar to those of men who use iron-like cauteries that resemble a ray and ignite it, and place it at that spot which is between the ribs, until they reach to that abscess and healthy sanity is restored, just as I have said in the case of the foot abscess.
However, in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because I have often seen it happen that the cautery reaches to the spot of the fistula where there is no health.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the mole.
When you cure the malady of the mole with what I have said about the curation in the division and do not confuse your curation, then cautelize on it according to three manners, all of which are straight-forward, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the mole, according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And it should be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle which we have held in the cautery of the foot in balance.
Do not grasp your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be elevated on their back.
And it is another way of cauterying, so it is that you should ignite the cautery having two vertices, which causes to have spoken in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and elevate the cord which is at the end of the molar bone where the patient feels the pain on the affected side.
And it should be your elevation where you elevate the cord according to the length of the body, so that several cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two vertices, ignite the motor, in that intro where those penetrate the cord of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you want, cautery with a cautery having three vertices.
And then you should cure the cautery better than letting it be carried by three years, because it is more comfortable than the other previous causes in the cure.
Chapter 31.
On the cautery of hydropic people.
Cauteries are not made on hydropic people, but rather in adjacent places properly.
When you cure the hydropic person with the methods of cure which we have spoken of in the division and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical area and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the molar bone, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the cord.
And then let the cautery remain open so that it can be carried for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure then with the cautery because it is necessary that they be added to their two intentions, and will be fastened to their two assistants for health.
The shape of the cautery which is used to cautery the belly should be clave-like according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that which is used to cautery the back should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter 32.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostematous in hydrops and full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water resolves.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery should be made at the extremity of the cautery cutter. And it should be the cautery according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and another at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And then let the open plague remain uncured for a long time, so that some water resolves from it.
And then cure them with those causes which we have spoken of.
Chapter 33.
On the cautery of belly and intestines.
When the belly and intestines are cold and humid, so that they debilitate the virtues, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those methods of cure and do not contradict, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting cauteries of virtue, then cautery that with a great cautery on the entire stomach according to what precedes in the cautery of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the subtle circuit of the umbilical area, with a subtle clave-like cautery; and with a cautery on the alcatin on a large aloesis, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities exhuberate and the patient is tolerant, then cautery that on the pentenilh and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguina, because it is a perfect cure of juvament which does not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors cold and humidities corrupted, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not contradict their tieua cure, then cautery them with three cauteries on the pus below the small and small triangular vertebrae, and a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
If it is deemed that the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food is not being digested, and their face is sometimes affected, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cautery; and place one cautery on the thigh, and another on the lower back with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and afterwards take care to heal the inside.
Chapter 35.
On cauterization of the thigh, afterwards prepare for their abscess to burst.
When you abscess the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is assembled into a rod. Afterwards insert that ignited rod into the abscessed thigh, and ultimately guide it inside until it reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make an incision of one or two fingers, because if the achilles tendon is too thick, then cauterize whichever of them according to what has been recounted, and afterwards take care of those that confer benefit to their joints until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the buttocks, it is more effective in healing.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural dermal layers of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal them with a cautery.
Therefore when you see a fistula in the natural dermal layer, and it is old, corroding the healthy part of it and humidifying corrupting matter, and therefore that which is more worthy to cover is that which proceeds with a subtle probe, and afterwards consider the quantity of the profundity of it before the aforementioned probe.
Afterwards ignite the cautery that resembles a rod. And afterwards insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it penetrates the probe.
And hold the cautery on that until they burn those corrupt bodies entirely, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it does not penetrate.
And afterwards take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the abscessed matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
And if the matter has not been removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of a corrupt bone, or something from those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or excessive windiness, and therefore the hollow of the patient's thigh is affected, then it is necessary that you cauterize that over the kidneys with a cautery on whichever kidney has a clavicular cautery, from which proceeds the remembrance.
And strongly cauterize them according to the second small indication, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and therefore they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the part most above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of notes on the skin of the buttock; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let it be a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix (womb).
When there is cold and humidity in the matrix (womb), and therefore conception is prohibited, and its menstruations are corrupted, and it is delayed the provocation of them, and it causes pain from the movement of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery on the lower part of the back, or two cauteries, and let it be a clavicular cautery.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When humidity often infiltrates the part of the ankle, and is a caused reason for the displacement of that joint, and it is signified by it that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is discovered in the boy's thigh.
Then cover the patient with a circular cautery around the affected area of their arm, since you have sensed that you have touched it in the circle of the affected area and thus it is revealed, and so that the affected part returns to its proper place within the circle.
And it is the cautery which precedes the form in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cautery that arm with three olive-shaped cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then take care that it be healed from within.
Chapter 41.
On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the affected area of the arm, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured by what we have said before, and it does not conflict, and it is ancient, then cover the patient with gross humors using foul pills or artificial semblances; and then cautery that.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with combustible medicines, or cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauteries the arm above the ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form; and make them with good depth. And it is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Some withered places have the cauteries in the proper place on the head of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cautery with the circle in which the form is precised in the cautery of the dislocation of the arm, and that circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain is adherent to the arm and does not extend within to the thigh.
But if it is extended within to the thigh, then cautery that arm with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain turns; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width below the affected part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and it is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient turns where the pain is extended within to the proper place near the toes, then cautery that here where it turns with a cautery of three points or four or more if it is indicated for that.
And if the patient turns where the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cautery that here with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cautery that you do not ultimately use the cautery in such a way that it burns nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason it is not on the patient's bad nourishment or contradiction.
And you have already seen one or another of those who cautery on the hip and ultimately in the cautery, and the burned focus inflamed within so that the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong solution of wine, and then death.
And if the pain is in two affected areas at the same time, cautery each one according to this manner.
And they described the wise men in the cautery of the arm, of which this is the manner: make a semblance to a circle of iron, whose circumference is the width of a palm; and it is seven orifices according to the thickness of a finger's bone or less than a little.
And then that circle is another inch; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the notch of the thumb; and those circles are used for two affected areas; and their length is one or two inches, and make an iron margin decently attached to the circles; and this is their form.
Then it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then it is placed over the affected area of the arm, the patient gathered over the sheet there. And then cautery that arm with three red-hot cauteries in one withering.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to the arm with a bandage and leave the ulcerated plague for many days; and then take care of the arm until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for this reason few have found those who regard it above.
But of the good cauteries to him who suffers, and find them in the place of it.
But cauteries with adhering medicines are that you make two circles having an armored perforation in which they would put the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the nakedness of them, there are two inches or those.
And if the spaces between which are among the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and thus opened and underneath, and thus that they contain themselves between their following this form:
And then stop on the affected area of the water that the patient is lying on, and comprehend your hand over the affected area of the water; and then take warm water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that water be at the small fire little by little, and apply it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderate and adjustment of it — because that atrocious moderate heat thus from fire — until the moderation ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and withdraw the warm water from all the affected area into watery doublings.
And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave it like that for some days, and correct the patient's poultice; this is the last step in the treatment.
And then heal that one who is wounded until he is healthy.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make a statue of it containing water according to what is done in the affected joint.
And this is the method of warm water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and caustic waters not extinguished by two kinds of ana, one part, and triturate them and stop in a new vessel of which the affected part is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
And stop there at the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and caustic water of sweet water which takes those for one finger, and since you comprehend those with your good compression, and leave the hole that descends from the sharp water in the affected part to another vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another cause of living and other alkaline renovelatz, because at that time it will be very strong and acute, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And thus among the medicines some are those which are cauterized strongly, thus with teas and honey and good sabur, in this way that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of pain from water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be free from that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because he is healthy for a long time thus as recommended, because he strongly believes in bathing and exercise, and so he is freed from that.
And it is that he takes certain green cetraragi, and if it is not fresh green, take recent fig; and much be triturated in a few gray ones and be stopped on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be released.
And it should be left for three hours' quantity or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put him in bath and then when his body is warmed up, put him in the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healthy.
And I know that it does not cover that some use of cauteries in these medicines except to evacuate the body.
Moreover, Escorides says that when the vein is constricted by the goat's foot, it is cauterized; and then I will do so to him: take wool and dip it in old oil, and put it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dry goat's foot and inflame that in fire until it becomes charcoal; and then stop it over the wool and leave it until it is extended. And then heat that, and do not cease doing that until the sensation of moderate heat penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cautery of goat's foot.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain in the Toes.
Some pains in the toes are caused by various causes, such as by bruising or percussion or by excessive evacuation, and by similar causes, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not done except in this sole species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with small, fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, because you have tenths in each line or cauteries, more or less, according to the quantity that one sees of the tolerance of the patient and of its virtue.
And thus is made the cauterization with pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial claveal cautery according to this form:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization at the commencement of gout treatment.
Mild remedies are given to these small children; and the sign of the commencement of it in children is that they stumble upon their erect structure and elevate with difficulty and limitation of movement.
And vertebrae in the back of the spine begin to protrude beyond the others, which have already started to overlie on top of the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that which is around the circle in accordance with this form: that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circular motion.
And if you wish, cauterize on the circuit of the spine with the pointed cautery at two lines or three. And then make points properly between them.
And then heal the area within, so that it will be healthy as we have said.
Be careful that the cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore how to cure gout caused by cold humors in many ways of treatment, and not just relieving the pain, then they remain cured with cauteries.
And it is that you should cauterize on the evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains penetrate into the teeth or other joints, and there are many remedies to be given, then cauterize that on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed, which these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but only just around the specificity of the code.
And if the pains penetrate into the tooth and back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands as well, and it is called sciatica, then puncture in the circuit of the veins thus as they revolve, puncture on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture in the circuit of the veins over each notch and over the palm of the hand.
And if the pains penetrate deeply into the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire part of the joints.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and flaccidity is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genital area, and it is beginning to suppurate, then it is necessary that you order the patient to fast for seven days and use lenient causes so that the fissure of the seventh ventricle may heal.
And follow the patient between your hands over the seventh vertebrae, and command him to hold the seventh wing inside so that it may be fortified or the cavity or intestines may appear.
And then return that to the fingers and sinew, holding the rupture over the bone of the pentagonal shape at the sign of the extremity, which is similar to the circle at the lower divided parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is its form:
until it becomes very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery, standing straight, and you will see that the bones of the pentagonal shape are conjoined inside the finger of the ring finger; and afterwards, another time, if you have not succeeded in the first treatment, you will try again until it is conjoined.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, lest it causes death or another great evil to the patient.
You should know that when you have the cautery in hand, do not touch the bone, as it does not contribute to your operation.
And it is fitting that the cautery for children should be subtle, according to their size and measure.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, so that the crust of the wound may be removed.
Then take care of those with other wounds until they are healed.
And let the patient sit on a soft pillow for forty days, until the wound is sealed and the plague.
And it is fitting that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time for his cure, which will lighten his stomach and not let the intestine come out due to the effort of healing.
Then when you want to get up after forty days, then administer the decoction decently made, and hold that for another forty days.
And let it be moderated by labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, he will be entirely healthy.
And I will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that there be no delay, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and let it be what is expelled from the codena, just as the third part of it; and then take care of him who has what we have said, and it will not be adjusted.
And I will show you first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked on the tent.
And there is a paused line that goes through the width in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand on a clave cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Chapter 46.
On the Cauterization of Hernia.
When there is pain in certain members due to a fall or percussion and it persists for a long time and does not contribute to the cure with medicines, then it is fitting that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of hernia and pain of it.
So if it is healthy due to the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat it on him with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains that they are punctured in a member near that member which approaches the one, so that you know how to use those cauteries until the patient is healthy.
Chapter 47.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
The leprous wounds are touched by the cautery for great juvenation, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And so as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and do not delay, neither here nor there, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends the entire body of him and all his complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one at the end of the hair; and two on both horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And finally place your hand on the cautery a little inside so that it impresses a small impression on the bone, and from it are dislocated the scorches, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize on the middle according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is fitting that you cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each ankle, and one on each shin, and two on each calf, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the seven feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said members and feet, and on each heel of his seven feet, and on the soles of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the heel that you do not burn those.
And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they will juvenate and confer; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they have said, so that the body of him is already stupified.
It seems that the text describes a medical procedure or treatment for a patient. Here is my attempt to translate the first sentence:
And then heal the cautery in the farina of the burnt area with honey and with another cure within, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On Cauterization for Stupor.
When some member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healed, then you cautetrize that numb member with cauterizations according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate into the narrowness of the channel in a little while. And then heal that which is inflamed within, so that it may be healthy.
And some wounded areas are cauterialized for certain numbness which goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and vessels of the nerves which govern that member, and the numbness is removed.
There is no pressure on it except that which is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter 49.
On Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to the remedies of medicine, then you cautetrize on that which is overgrown with a pointed cautery in a little while according to the quantity of the specific nature of the channel within, so that the whiteness and color of it may be restored, and its color may be changed.
And then heal that which is farina of errors and of lentils with rose oil and with leaves of dragonwort, and with the blood of pigeon or with the blood of yronda, from each one a part and all are mixed together, and then let it be anointed with a cloth and placed over the area until it may be healthy.
Chapter 50.
On Cauterization of Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cautetrize that with a circular cautery in the circuit of it, thus as it is turned around.
And I will teach you that it should be cauterrated with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it has not been seen, because I think that it is ulcerated, and already I have seen some wounded areas.
And it is better to cautetrize in the circuit of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On Cauterization of Abundant Humors.
When some abundant humors are delayed in maturation, and thus they are due to the superfluous nature making that, or because of the bad state of the patient, which is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of abundant humors; then cautetrize in the circuit of it with many small pointed cauteries; and then let it be, for it will fasten into maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and place that in the middle place of abundant humors until it penetrates the channel.
And if you cautetrize in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that until it may be healthy.
Chapter 52.
On Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrosion is corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore if you want to burn that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cautery with fire, then you ignite clave-shaped cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
And then cautetrize that from all parts until you eradicate all the corrosion and none of its causes remain.
And then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterialized places a triple layer of mixed oil until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
And then heal that which is inflamed flesh generating flesh.
But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains rotten in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with acute medicine, because that is a middle ground in place of cautery. But Emperor Cautery with fire is of more use for youthful rejuvenation.
And I have already said the cure of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that which is of its auras' endurance.
Chapter 53.
On Cauterization of Wounds and of Other Similar Things.
Many wounded areas go to the lower parts of the foot afflicted with what is called a wound, and it is a gross, inward cause, which wounds the foot; and cauteries are used in those according to two manners, thus it is cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
More cauterization should be done with a red-hot iron, which seems to penetrate deeply, according to the quantity of humor that each part of the body contains, and it should be done with subtle margins.
And then stop the fire on the nail, and return your hand to the cautery in the circle of the nail until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail. And let it stand for three days until you start to feel better. And then apply a plaster made with malva and salvage roots in salt, and let the plaster stay on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place affected by generating new flesh until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and morbid matters accumulate on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer those cauteries with water, and it is necessary to take a cannula of iron or fire or red-hot iron, and place it on the nail; and put the cannula in hot water for a short time, and remove your hand, and return it to compression with your whole hand, and it should be pressed on the margin of the cannula into the root of the nail, and obstruct the flow of hot water via the hole of the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while, until the biting sensation of the hot water passes for an hour, and then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do to those things and then add another until you overcome all the humors that are in the body.
And then heal those pustules since the roots of the nails are eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate on its own without any infection.
Chapter 3.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When it happens that a tremor occurs due to cold in the nerves or due to fever caused by cold, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterialize with four cauteries or five above the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and apply a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, a cautery of olive oil.
And the tremor of it is restored and strengthened by the health of the patient's cold constitution.
Chapter 4.
On Cauterization of Accidental Wounds to the Body.
When in the body there are accidental wounds, and pus-filled abscesses which are caused by corrupt gross matter; therefore it is necessary to begin with appearance, that it should be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose extremity is extended with fire; or with a root of long aristology; or with a slow-burning cautery.
And the scabs that are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they do not grow, and the superfluous flesh is dispersed, making them healthy.
More importantly, it is necessary that this be done with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 6.
On Cauterization of Flowing Blood due to Incision of Arteries.
Many times flowing blood from arteries that are incised by the wound which has become putrid, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and thus it seems difficult to stop it.
Therefore when it happens to reach that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop there until it is strengthened enough to stop the flow of blood from the wound, and so that it does not come out.
And then stop at the focus of the cauteries with olive oil and grapes, by name of many, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding it so that you may return the flow of blood, and you cautelize until it is bound and restored, that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you return the flow and extract the cauteries, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that are prepared in the focus, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restored.
And beware that you do not harm the nerves that are here, and that another evil does not come over the patient's other evils.
And know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restore the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either cautery as I have said, or extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are harmed and the blood is restored, or that it be tied with a faithful bandage or with a strong structure, or that they are stopped with medicines which have the virtue of restraining the blood; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar with decent constriction.
Those who administer treatment should decently restrain themselves from lamenting and straining, and not overstep their position, lest they worsen the causes of combustion and similarity, not comforting unless it's bitter.
But if one endeavors to heal and is not a present doctor, then work on the indicated pause of the said orifice with that vein, as we have said, and intend to the great constriction within so the blood is stopped from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it is not rebuffed; and above the artery is aspirated with much cold water of great coldness within so the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps it is necessary to cauterize or medicate.
Of incision and perforation and ventosas and of phlebotomy and of sores and their similars.
I have said in the first chapter all about malady in which cautery is convenient and medicine combustion, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I will order the chapters of the inferior part of the head until the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be of use to whoever needs it, then on what will be demanded.
And therefore I begin here, certainly, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that which is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, such as evacuation of blood with aspiration of the vein or incision on the apostema or perception of exstirpation or purification of the plague or extraction of sageta or incision of stone and their similars. And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their cats death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the situation, because some evacuations happen due to your mannerisms of men with mannerisms of many maladies. And of them it is said that they flee from their malady and escape death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find in their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady is fear which signifies death.
And of those it is given to you to have and to say, you waiting in that sanity, and the following malady is pernicious.
And therefore you do not consent to that which is seen by you of this manner; and your caution should be greater than confidence and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over what is certain science that verifies it in you, and to which you perceive successful praise.
And you are established in the cure of all your maladies with prognosis and indication of it which is converted health, because in that you have help above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters according to what proceeds in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be of use to you whatever you demand of it and whatever you need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
You know that this malady many times occurs in infants from birth and when the nursery is strengthened, the head of the infant is freed from lividity.
And some evacuations occur due to a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a lamentable work in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of it was always magnified until it ceased to be able to support itself because of the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity increased until it died from heat.
And this humidity or is added between the codena and the bone, or is added below the bone on the siphac.
Because the operation on it if the humidity is between the codena and the bone and the apostema is small, then you find in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two nodes until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the apostema is greater, then there are two fissures here according to this manner.
And if the humidity is below the bone, it is signified that you see the commissures of the head opened from all parts and the water is sprinkled when you comprehend this in the tie and at the internal parts and it is not what you hide. Look for three fissures in the brain according to this method.
And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and plums; and then apply something on top for six days, and then relieve the ligament and cure the plague in ten tries and bandages, and strengthen the head with equality; eat the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
And there is another method of incision, which considers how to bring out the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated areas are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the flow of water is released, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid flowing blood and death of the patient by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter third.
When you find some catarrh or rheum in the veins or at the feet, and it is antiquated there, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And then look when you want to incise those that the patient's blood flows to their head, and make a rough drap on the surface with a pointed instrument so that the arteries appear, and make the neck of the patient strong with some drap; and consider the pulse of the vein; and the places above the places which are close to the kidneys are removed, and they are hidden until some hours.
And then sew above the artery with a thread, and incise some part of some affected area near the incision penetrating into the bone, and it is done for the width of the head.
And if you want, remove the spatium below the artery and cut it to equalize the incisions at the upper parts.
And it is the length of the incision that measures two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised the blood is released in a pulsating outflow, which is felt before for its frequent beats.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then look for the measurement of the kidney's quantity of three digit spaces, and sew above with a thread, and do it until it reaches the bone.
And that is how to stop the flow of blood which is a quantity of six ounces. and far from getting more of it, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the strength of the patient and the replenishment of their artery.
And then consider the plague, and if there remains some cause of the disease on the bone, then incise it so that no abscess is left behind.
And then strengthen the plague with plums and ligaments of drap, and then cure it with bandages until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When some ancient or chronic catarrh or sharpness has migrated to the temples, due to humidity and quality in the lacrimal glands of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with medical cures and that does not confer, then we have progressed into these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those eyes as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient's blood flows to the skin which is in the temples; and attend to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the pulse, and it is hidden until a few hours due to the vehemence of the drap.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some drap; and make a rough drap on the surface with a pointed instrument or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then take the spatium of which this is the form: And then score the cord in that which is facilitated until you reach the artery; and take out the vein and extract it from the upper parts until you extract it from the cord and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of the entire part.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it at the extremity of the vein, and incise it in one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not pour out entirely.
And then evacuate six ounces of blood. until three.
If the acidity is great, then it is necessary to bind that in two places with strong double ropes or cords at length, and not to touch the putrid matter during the consolidation of the wound and stopping the flow of blood.
Then cut away the excess flesh which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inserted into the bone, cutting into it so that the extremities of it are burned, and remain in place of that bad mixture.
And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; for cautery is one of those causes that helps to eliminate the finishing humidity, and therefore it is better in judgement.
And it is necessary to extract the acidity that fills the place of ancient wound, and then pause on the decently made poultice, and then be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh and bones whole again so that it may be healthy.
And if meanwhile you are working on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the acidity, then you touch it to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or fill the place of the wound, and strengthen your hand within so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place until the blood is congealed, and moisten the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acidity rests, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And it is better to extract the acidity by cauterying the vein with this cautery having two ends, since you have touched the two places tentatively, and paused sometimes, not moving much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it may be elongated, because they are not consolidated entirely by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the acidity of the two ends together. But emperor, if you mix the acidity of two ends together it is better, because if you sharpen them with two proper ends towards each wound, and do not burn the flesh with velocity.
Therefore, since there is some grossness in those, it has held the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is separated more lightly.
And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
And it is the space which is between two ends, the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies of sharp and acidic humors of the wells.
When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the bed before, and do not find in that any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already becomes red, and feels on the dry front of walking thus as if it were a walking of ants, and the wells of that are exhausted, humidifying thus that the skin of their son is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the acidity of the tears, the ancient masters most agree in the cure of those of this operation, and no one names that cure with spat.
And it is that you command the patient to walk on the skin which is on the dry front, and then make three grooves at a distance equal to the length of the front. And if the length of the groove falls into two digits: one groove is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the acidity which is in two sides, and elongate your hand from the continuity of both jaws. And if the space of each beginning is adjusted to the quantity of three digits.
And if you have a piece of spongy material prepared or dry cloths that are moved towards the ones that dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it: which is from the partition of the temples until the second incision. Extract all that code which is between two incisions on the siphac which is above the bone, and then do it from the middle incision towards the second incision. And then straighten this spatula and insert it into the first incision, or use another instrument called a cutter, sharpened on one side and not on the other.
And pause the side of that sharpened part towards the adjacent flesh of the code, and the side of it beneath the bone, and employ it until it reaches the middle groove, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the wells.
But it is continued to the incision up to that part of the code, and then do it in the middle groove until the other groove.
Because blood flow is obstructed in quantity, express the congested areas of the blood vessels of the obstructed blood.
And stop in any deep wound of the outer layer of the skin, and stop above those swollen veins that are inflamed and oily, and beware that you do not cause an abscess with a hot cautery.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a great abundance of warm water or decoction, and then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients that the wounds may be healed.
Chapter 5.
About the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and also about the descending humors from the divided parts of the head.
When one has catarrh coming from above and it continues, and sometimes the humors of the patient are exhausted and small, and already their strength is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of that the skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent inflammation, then you will know by this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the divided parts above.
And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a vein on the middle of the forehead, a small one for the latitude (and begin with the incision of the left temple towards the right temple; and insert it into the bone; and stretch out your hand from the lacrimal ducts of the temples which are affected by the mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry out all the blood that is in the sponge or absorbent cloth and then replace it between the two lips of the wound with outer skin or absorbent cloths. And stretch below swollen veins that are inflamed and oily, so that you do not cause an abscess with a hot cautery.
And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then you should scrape the bone until it begins to form new flesh, and then cure with a regiment of desiccative ointment which makes the flesh grow, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an emplastre and apply it to these wounds on the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
About the cure of those that fall into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral pebbles or a cause similar to pebbles, thus as iron and veins, or it is from a plant thus as cress or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus as water and oily things and their similarities, or some beast.
And then when pebbles fall into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if times the pebbles, then distill in some oily violet or sapphire, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stomach condense, and open the nostrils to receive the event of evacuation. And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not gotten out, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called a subtle gestatory epicicary, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gestation, well; and if not, then administer extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of iron and insert the extremity of the canal into the trunk of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oily things mollified so that nothing passes except the canal. And then extract it with the strong ventilation attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with water that we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alumina powder or powdered vinegar apparatus which are pressed into the little quantity of wings, and stop that at the extremity of the radius, and then envelop it decently over the outer layer. And then insert that into the trunk of the ear facilitated, and then extract the ear from humidity.
And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch such a thing that an abscess or spasm will be caused.
And the manner of touching that thing is that you at the beginning sensibly open the vein of the patient and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a circle between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear where the gravity of it is first perceived. And it is the fissure of lunar figure until it reaches the pebble, and, the pebble extracted, or removed that if you can with an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it until it is healthy.
If the cause of the case is an abundance of fat that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obtain obedience from your patient, then take subtle steps in this manner: and administer to that person the removal of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And do not hesitate when you think that it has been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many small pieces, and try to extract those with the fingers or gestures, or with a subtle insertion, as it is said to have alleviated the extraction of it.
But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary to use a sternutatory condition at the beginning, and fill the entire ear with much warm liquid, and pour it over the ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three or four lukewarm towels according to the length of the finger, and place them in the fire for a short time, and the patient will insert one of those into the hole of their ear and press on one side of that partition and percuss with another pincer on the pincer that is touching the ear. So, do not cease to pour water into the ear until all the water has been forgotten.
So, do not cease to pour water into the ear until all the water has been forgotten. And once the water is forgotten, then you will take pieces of paper or cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned by the heat of it.
And then put another cotton and make so many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw it out with a cannula as it is said to be the extraordinary pincer.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and extract it thus, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and fingers, and the cause of it is purer than all other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of generated worms from the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle fingers, but if no cause appears, then take a straight and widened cannula, and that is the form of it. And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck it out with strong suction, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obtain obedience from your patient, then operate and close in the circle of the cannula as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experimented on by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And this is your effusion which you pour out the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form. And make that of silver or copper, straight, in which there is a small hole, and flat underneath.
And so it is how they fill up what is lacking in the cavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here. And if you want, take the rod and wrap it decently in the extremity of the cannula, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put into the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with warmth underneath and express your hand on that compression tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And what has been poured into the ear will have been warmed by fire for a short time. And beware that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, because ear medicines do not bear it.
Chapter 7.
On the Cure of Opilation of Ears.
Some turns of certain infants are born with ears that are not perforated, and this happens in some homes, opilation in the middle of the ear due to a plague or carnation in it; and this opilation occurs in the prison of the ear canal which does not allow movement, and some turns are in the fore-part.
And that which happens in its prison, which does not allow movement, is among the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that which follows movement, it is necessary that you expose the ear of the patient to sunlight and observe it. And then if sometimes an apparent swelling occurs, it is above that subtle space of which this is the shape of it:
If the extremity of it is in which there is small latitude, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the space is of two lateral lines so that it does not touch the auricle.
And then if the swelling is from born flesh in the auricle or in its meat, then that has subtle and inclined violent facilities to enter so that all the flesh is stopped.
And if the swelling is in the curve of the auricle, then take subtle lateral lines and scrape off that focus on a few points, and then place them in the meat of the auricle.
And then if you feel a swelling in that which the patient is bothered by, facilitated by the gravity of ascending, it forces the oppression of it facilitated; and beware that it does not harm the nerves of the auricle.
And then place a dressing on the auricle according to the quantity of the wide part of the bandage which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a bowl, pulverize it over the already trussed and used bandage; and if the auricle has already been apostemed, then cover so that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you will envelop in wax, so that it is made with roasting oil, until it is the apostemated cautery; and then heal it until it is healthy.
Maybe you will stop the flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the auricle, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the cure of athetosis which occurs in the eyelids.
Athetosis which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes sometimes has humid, sometimes dry symptoms.
Then it is necessary that you hold those with tenacious or incised fingers, and examine those which are the space of their roots, and then place a dressing on the already trussed areas.
Maybe you have pain with flow of blood coming, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
And the best cautery is to remove the incisions and dry ulcers that return when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure of granulations that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Humid matter accumulates in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled into granulations in its strength and hardness, and thus granulation is called.
And it is an addition of coarse humidity in the lower eyelid and underneath.
Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the granulation is proceeding from it in what appears on the eyelid and is mauled to the whole part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make a fissure above it for the latitude, and then scrape off that whole part facilitated until it evacuates, and then suspend it with an incised finger and abscess it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the granulation is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the superficial deepness, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the granulation with an incised finger, otherwise you will indicate the incision, and press on that whole part, and if the eyelid by incision is prolonged, that is not noticed in any cause.
And then make an incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the area with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the cure of axirnah in the lower eyelid of the eye.
Axirnah is a grey thing which is engendered in the tunics of the lower eyelid, and it increases especially in children, aggravates the eyes of those who have it, and accelerates their catarrh; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sun's light because of that which gathers and coytans to them.
And thus you often find them complaining about their eyes for a long time, and about their eyes sleeping; and so in the lower eyelids of theirs, the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent acceleration is in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel acceleration until it reaches them.
For some manipulation of operation is in that patient whose thighs pause the sick head on the tie, and then pause to drap of them and of their calve, and make a circle according to the quantity that it contains of total partition, and then pause that over that and press am the ties of total per that be aggregated arc in the middle of the circle, and then put an end in the middle of that humidity incident in the fissure for the latitude, and the fissure not be major than the fissure made in phlebotomy.
Maybe in the preceding hollow that you find the entire code within which you penetrate to reach the arc, because in the major deposits processes the arc by fissure according to the form of white greyishness.
Then extract that which you have wrapped between the ties of total parts before and revolve between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that the spatula does not penetrate to the vein and descends to that.
Maybe if your arc does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, maybe you adjust in the fissure a small facility until you process the arc; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge draps of them in water and see and agree and place them over the area and strengthen those with poultices.
And thus you will draw salt water and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
And then heal that until it is healthy.
Maybe if you find a post-apostemic ulcer, then cure that with applied placental poultices until it is healthy.
Chapter 11.
On the methods of touching the vein.
When in the eyelids of the veins there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those that bother the vein and cause maladies such as assiduous tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until it is a cause of destruction of the vein called touching of the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or by making incisions and sutures; or with canes as you will be directed.
And then cover that you pause the head of the patient in the tie; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, good; and if not, insert a needle in that where there is faith in the partition beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from above, and it will be — near the edge of the eyelid where the veins are — near the veins, and pull the faith to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert that into the ray.
And then put an end in the partition beneath the eyelid beneath the adjusted veins with a spatula incident of the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal; and then extract the faith and place it beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with a tender touch, and it will be thus like a figure of a myrtle leaf.
Maybe emperor, it is the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because it has already been diversified in men, because of those that indicate that a great quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then put an end with the spatula over the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal into the smaller lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural veins thus like the great vein of the king.
And then place the onus in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle lanolin or wool on the two labial lips, and purge the blood, and make it adhere to what is superfluous from the veins onto two supernumerary eyebrows for certain visionary causes, if you wish to do so, and if not, do not cure.
And then leave the suture of the veins for three days or four, and then cure that.
And if you wish, leave the plague with its suture, and cure that in what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the plague and its aggregation; maybe the suture is better. Therefore, I thus dismiss the ancient taxes.
Maybe emperor, it is solicited about the patient, and it is of good operation, and it is not in fear.
And it is another method in phlebotomy, and it is that you mark on the eyelid figure thus like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and conjoined inches according to this form.
Maybe if it is not possible to have the inches, and it is not enguiled, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other vein near the larger lacrimal, and the vein according to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the total veins with equality, and then elevate your hand in elevation enguiled, elevate all the code above which has been marked thus as we have recommended.
And you adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure that which is within so it may be healthy.
Perhaps you have caused an abscess to form on your incision or your fissure, but that abscess is hardened and similar to the ulcer, and it has become swollen.
And some weakened eyelids that are converted into those like scales, therefore you should use them in that of water which we have spoken of as an incision; perhaps suture in some cases is more artificial.
To treat it with canes according to this method: and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure which is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then you use two canes or two subtle steel instruments, of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs is less than the latitude of the spatium. And you have made an incision in the extremities of some divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add some subtlety under the part that superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the canes of some divided parts in a strong structure, and thus it will be for some years, because the cord for the morbid structure will be denied and will be hidden until it is seen to fall apart.
Perhaps it is delayed, then cut the skin with the scalpels, and then cure the wound until it is healthy.
So when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the scales do not puncture.
And this is the method of using two canes which you will make according to this form: and there is the quantity of the length and of the latitude, neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of piercing scales on the wheel when the scale is hard.
When the scales are unnatural, hard and rough and piercing the wheels, then the operation on them is that you take a subtle awl and pauses in that subtle file of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move in some manner subtly. And it is the length of the files of a quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle file below it briefly, and anoint the extremities of that if you want.
And then stop the patient's bad humor in the tender seat, and it is proper of the sun for which your work may be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted scale which has needed to be engendered, and make it penetrate firmly into the eyelid until you extract that from beneath the natural scale.
And then pull the scale out from underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and thus the scales will be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand on that until the scale is forged into the alloy in the eyelid with the natural scale.
Perhaps it is alloyed and the scale is not yet set, you will alloy the parts below with the file which you have composed in that, until it is alloyed above the transparent straw.
And you will see the wheel in its vision, because then you will set the alloy and the file, and you will grasp some and close the wheel, and leave the key for two days or three, until the scale adheres to its own place and is born on that good flesh.
And if the scale is more brief, then you adjust a long scale of natural scales, and it is elevated in that, or that which remains until it is lengthened to another space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter 13.
On the cure of evacuating what you see in the eyelid beneath.
When you evacuate in the wheel, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, and it is called leprosy, and this evacuation is natural or accidental, and it is made for consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, or for similarity to their bad curings.
There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it until it is between those a kind of layer of linen cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
And you do not know that you use the cure of it from the causes which are exhausted, constraining; because if you make that return to evacuation, worse than nothing, you will not have had anything for some time.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as it is fenugreek, and imbue with water in which there are coytz altea and sensation of linen cloth, or enguent diyaquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge in that layer, and cure in that.
The essence of your treatment is that you thoroughly penetrate all parts so it doesn't consolidate according to the form you focus on at the beginning.
And in this operation, which we have described, it is not but a certain rectification of the humors that do not return the shape of the place according to the focus then.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of hernia that is made in the eyelid below.
This hernia that is made in the eyelid below, which is naturally called hernia; and it is of two kinds, natural and accidental.
The accidental one is caused by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you place it in the flesh, and you make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extreme ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and pull it towards the needle, and insert it into the spatula widely. And then the shape of the eyelid returns according to its natural form; if not, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two fissures on the edge of the lower eyelid.
And the extreme ends of the two fissures form two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and it is from their being made in an angle that when they come together they form the shape of theirs.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh according to the quantity that is the edge of the lower eyelid, so that the eyelid is freed.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then take care of them with the softening medications and poultices until they are healed.
And if the hernia is opened by a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure over the skin of the eyelid according to what has been prescribed. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In summary of the sermon on the treatment of hernia when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to the form of hernia it is prepared, and this is in various forms of diverse protrusions.
And the skilled artisans always prepare everything in such a way that it is possible to return the shape to its natural form, or near to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people in this way, so that the eyelid is solidly attached above on the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it, or stretch it with the nail.
And then you make the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp enough to make incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatula that does not touch the eye in its sharpness.
And this is your incision that excavates that adhesion with facility until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and place on the eye a piece of linen infused with album of egg, and then use three days of consolidated causes until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the incision of the nail and prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
You know that the nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and resembles a subtle cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, resembling a whitish humidity congealed, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on the nail, it is abscessed and the nail does not stick to it.
And both species do not begin except from the larger tear duct until it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
The way of operating in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in a tie, and then operates on the eyes, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail from the little duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into a horse's hair or ox's or cow's, or similar, or strong wire, or duplicate the extremity of the small needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with wire; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excavate around the skin at the edge of the nail which is the pupil. And thus you will follow that medicine into the patient's belly through the rear of it.
And you will insert the rhubarb into the radix of the tear duct with subtle spatula or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the tear duct naturally, so that by inserting it, no continued fluxes of tears occur.
And sometimes the nail of the sole is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's spatula, from which this is the form of it.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunics with the spatula and that it does not break into it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then insert a small amount of thrice-blessed salt or seventh-day fire into the wound, and let it stay there for another day; and then take care that the water that covers it will be sanctified.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, or it is fixed in that sole, then many times this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as you have recounted in the division.
And if you want to insert it, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula of sharp-edged fretum according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarified and congealed and enters into the radix, then distill from your work in the wound of seventh-day fire or with seventh-day rog or thrice-blessed salt, and open the wound until another day.
And then iterate over that operation until it is completely remade, so that there is nothing left of it, unless the contrary, a postema caution should be in the wound, because then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to remove the postema until it is healed.
And then iterate your operation on that reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice in the wound for great nuisance, should be suspended with an onion; and insert that from that one part, and do not exceed the insertion so that no continued fluxes of tears occur.
And then distill into the tear duct seventh-day rog and fire of seventh day until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the insertion of aluminum and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Some wounds on the skin of some people are born from red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to compress the eyelids towards the divided parts beforehand, and it is assembled like a rose of balconet.
More, the operation in it is that the patient holds his head on the tieu seat; and then open the wounds of that and collect all that flesh with convenient onions, and you have a forceps or a chest; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that does not loosen those who deviate from your operation.
And it is your insertion in which you insert those or with the spatula that we have recounted in the insertion of the nail, or small forceps with which it is collected ascetically according to what will be the form of it, as we will find in this chapter.
When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is remade, then fill the wound with thrice-blessed salt, or distill into the red powder and apply it to the wounds of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound beforehand a covering of albumen until it is assured against postema caution.
And if some cause of aluminum and it is lordagged with holy caution, and fears postema caution, then leave the wound and take care of that postema in what will remove that postema, and then iterate over that operation until it is healed, and similarly make a just-adjusted flesh which accedes to the wound of this species.
Moreover, I command you to cover that entire cure of the wound by natural way or by accidental way, open with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabur comes from red wounds which are tested over the wound and prohibit the vessels' operation, and they develop the wound in longitude of days.
Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other malady than sabur, then you collect that sabur.
And it is that you command the patient to hold his head on the tieu seat, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle double application according to this form.
or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
And you should gather those veins in subtle foresight, with subtlety, and evacuate the blood at that hour, until those veins are relieved of their fluid and you revive them.
And beware that you do not lead the fluid into the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is during midday under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that nothing flows except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill the fluid into a clear green or red oil so that the corroding acidity is removed from the sabelline.
But if it is not possible for you to collect it all at that hour, then apply a poultice to the area that gives him pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is calmed and assuredly free of apostemic caution.
And then iterate over him according to the manner of the Mateyssa, until he is healed.
And this is the form of the medications:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute medication, according to what is narrated about him and he is not healed, then it is not engendered in him unless you focus on the aposteme that shows the maturity of him, and that you extract all the humidity which is in him until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape him with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named an aspere cap, and it is made of iron indeed, and the cap is rounded thus as to reach the which is made pointed for puncturing with lime or alkali for subtle puncturing (thus as it is in the following form).
And stop that on the corrupted bone area, and then revolve it between the fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is reduced.
And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the area with causes of desiccative and styptic remedies.
Then if the area is consolidated and it is in good flesh and is separated from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it does not deteriorate and does not become apostemated and does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering unless to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover with iron or acute medication, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribes according to this form:
It is the extraction of the iron in triangular shape, and the staff of it is first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then stop that on the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little with the fluid, and then revolve your hand with the tribe until it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the pain for as long as it takes to arrive at the bottom, so that you can feel with your hand.
Then restore the area with styptic medicines that desiccate thus as I have described it to you.
Then when the flesh and the area are indurated, then the matter which was poured into the affected parts before returns to the nose, so that is why it is easier to cure the pain.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the fluid.
When the fluid eminates in its totality and does not fall into vexing numbness or diminution, then it is necessary to leave the pain, and then follow, and stop making ventoses on the cervical scars with good scarification; and stop putting on the fluid a liniment made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and put a strengthening plaster on the fluid with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take draps of the lions' powder, and each drap is duplicated into four pieces; and make them from those powders.
And then stop those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the fluid has need. And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the ventoses with good scarification; and then remove the ventoses and leave the fluid strained day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very strained.
And then remove the ligament day and night thus as I have said.
And if sometimes the fluid has already been reduced, well, and otherwise, then iterate the plaster with powders and structure and ventoses until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the prominence of the tunicate uvea.
When you make a disruption in the tunicate uvea, and then it is prominent and proceeds outward through the eyelids thus as a grain of rasim, and its form is rounded for that, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is thus as I have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea of the lower part below the upper part, and then put another needle in the double filament of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double filament and lift it with that part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it thus.
And then extract the bitter substance and pause over the wounded area, where an abundance of humors has flowed into the urine and it seems that the thread is in the grape.
And then treat the wound with water that comforts within, so that the plague may be healed.
Some vegetables are added to the entire affected area around the circle of cloth within the wound, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that comes from the surface of the wound, and corrects the albugean humidity, and descends into the wound and enters thus.
And then strengthen within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This illness called ulcer does not exist, but is only an abscess that is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
The manner of operating on it is that you make the ulcer sit over the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cloth in both hands more than two parts and mauve within so that you see the health coming to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and stays in the light, and the ulcer sees the causes thus as it was.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
But if the descent to health in water, which we have said, is not prepared, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and do so over the surrounding panniculus, circling a little of the continuity of the conjunctiva in the corneal crown (in the place you see), so that the health may be forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the wound water that has been heated in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it is treated for the other causes within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of descending water from the wound.
We have said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with a declarative sermon, then according to the health.
Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands over a hot stone and bind the dry wound with a very tight knot.
And then pause near the eyelid of your dry wound with your left hand, if the wound is on the left; or with your right hand, if the wound is on the right.
And then with your right hand take the medicine, if the wound is on the left; or with your left hand, if the wound is on the right.
And then pause the extremity of the medicine near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the album of the wound on the part of the lacrimal gland, and then pour the medicine into a glass and rotate your hand in it.
And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the medicine has already arrived at the cause, which is seen.
And it is necessary that it be the measure of the path of the medicine to the surface of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the wound through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause the medicine within the place where the water is, and then you will lower it below once again, and thus if the water descends thus, then you will see the ulcer that is above where the patient's sight is thus, and the medicine in the dry wound.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will pause again before the medicine is touched.
And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the medicine with ease, and rotate it a little with your hand, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemma and in that lava the wound is purified; and then pause outside the wound, or stop, or anoint with oil rosated and album of urine and ligature on that wound.
But we and those who are of our time pause over that as written in the album of urine.
And if you do not obey your medicine within the instrument of the wound for its duration — because it is a duty of the men whose wound is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called albared from which this is the form:.
And then perforate at that conjunction, and do not exceed your hand in the trajectory, and it is not so that you make a way to the medicine in a subtle place.
And then introduce the medicine according to what we have said.
And give the complement of your work, be prepared for the ulcer to descend slowly into the wound where it sleeps on the dry back in a dark and tenebrous place, and be prohibited from all movements.
And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature may be aligned, and do not move the dry head to the right or left part of all.
It should be treated according to its disposition until the third day.
And then remove it from that dark and troubled place, and examine the free view, and see if there are some causes, and then return the treatment until the seventh day.
And do not cover that opening at the time of the treatments or almost immediately afterwards, the infusion. Keep covered that you close it quickly so that the water does not leak out strongly and vehemently with great regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then uncover it before the seventh day, and correct that which was giving rise to the abscess.
Then you will absolve the view of it and pause over the face of its orifice, by which the evacuation of its contents may be regulated for some days, existing in that dark and troubled place.
And then it will be extracted from that dark place gradually and turned into its causes.
And you know that in this case it is not excused to dismiss the disciple from seeing certain visions, and then you will be bold about the operation.
And now it has come to us from some of those who are at the Artach, and they say that they made a focus in the pierced Ayrac magazine, which is succeeded by the water.
But I have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected it, nor is it written in the books of the ancient authors; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of pierced magazine, which are above those that ignore them:
They are made of iron or of sharp metal, and they are the extremities of their own with this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted to those which are some cause which is assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a many-footed polyp; and this malady is called polyp because it resembles that foot represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover the malady with a separator between your hands and place it in the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and pierce the tendon once in those flesh. And then extract it from the previous parts, and then inscribe that which you have comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part into another so that you know that all the flesh is restored; because if there remains any cause of which the abscess is possible, then you will return to it with one of the subtle instruments facilitated in order that none of the causes remain. But if it is a holy sign or an abscess, then you pause at what covers; or it is of the malignant apostemas, then you touch and cauterize that until it is absolved holy and all the cavities are restored.
And then it will be cut in the nose, then the incision will agree with water or wine. But if the nose is open and of the processes humidity enters into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate according to what covers, then you know that it is flesh in the purulent matter of the nostrils which have not been abscessed.
Therefore then cover that you put in the faithful one of the quale is some grossness, and anoint with many nuts, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or month, and engender the malady and put in one extremity of the faithful one in the nostrils with the ray or with another cause which is possible.
And then it will be made, that it attracts the sweet odorament into the canals of the nostrils, and it is placed on the sweet galley, because many visions resemble this action, making the children go to school, and it is a legitimate cause for one who wants to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the faithful one, one extremity that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer serrature of flesh in the nuts that are in the faithful one, and make it enter so that you know that the flesh is already in the nuts of the faithful one.
And then extract the faithful one, and pause in the nose according to the abstraction of a holy water, and make it for three days or more until you corrupt all that which is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for many days until it is healed.
But if there are ends of treatment that exist, use those.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a purge, which makes distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And if you use silver or copper, which seems like a small lantern inserted, thus with a small tube, and the meat similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube thus like a cane, and the handle of the instrument is a flat perforator, uncovered; which has a handhold in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to suck out of the oil or what you want of the succulent causes.
Chapter 25.
They are born naturally at the ends of the nose.
Moist vapors are born naturally at the ends of the nose, and they are magnificent and mentioned in several days before it is easy to observe them.
And for that reason you should inject them at the beginning of their appearance, and eradicate all of it. And then stop over the area with a cautery or burning medicine that was in place of it.
But if the injection is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it has become putrid, hard, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that iron quart which is an aposteme of cruel wounds; because moist vapors are injected into that grand malice over that which it had.
And if the aposteme is of a warm touch and not of dark color, and it seems that injection is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and inject without fear, and cure the area with water that exhales and constrains until it is healthy.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
You know that when you apply a solution of continuity to one of these cartilages, few confer benefits in that operation except in some homes.
Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and then cure it until it is healthy.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract each part of its apparent code until it becomes holy. And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and on those sprinkle holy dragon's powder and three times, and place over the powder a piece of dialectical plaster, or of some other consolidating plasters, and leave it like that for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster and leave it until the wounds are closed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healthy.
But the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with threads thus as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with faith thus as you and I know.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Moist vapors come to some homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes hard similar to fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you convert the lips and divide each of those hardnesses from all parts, and then absorb the umpliscas place with holy trinity until the wounds are restored, and then it is washed with a gentle agreement and the area is cured with water that is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
About the injection of adjusted flesh in the gums.
A great abundance of moist vapors is gathered above the adjusted flesh gum, which the ancient physicians call bulbous, therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a finger or hold it with forceps and inject it beneath the root, and let the healthy humor flow or the holy blood.
And then stop over the holy trinity place or other stipulated powders or excitatives.
And if that flesh returns, then inject it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the root of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and of those of the form and between the adjusted gums, there are scours, ulcers, and some moist vapors are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by that decay and the teeth are ulcerated.
Then you should make the patient sit between your thighs and place their head on your tie, and hold their teeth in those which appear to be the same as the affected areas, and it seems that there is no break from any cause, and that is due to black bile and citrinitat and other internal causes that are not monodified.
So if it is established that it is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you will repeat the reasoning over those on another day and on the second and third until you come to the last statement that you desire.
And you know that the teeth have need of many various forms of roots and of many figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And for that reason the roots of the tooth are those which are rooted in the partition of the teeth, and another root is that which is rubbed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots you should prepare as you will see shortly.
Chapter xxx.
On the eradication of teeth.
Because you cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and tardiness in the complete eradication of it, for there is no cause that supplies the void left when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which excision occurs in the eradication of it.
Moreover, because the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you must be firmly certain what the painful tooth is, for many voids alleviate the pain and convince that it is a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have not seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how can you be certain what the painful tooth is, and what you know to be, then because you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gingiva of the entire partition, and then you move those threads gently, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concedes.
And then you apply force with strong threads for good loquacious or sturdy stoppage, and pause the head of the patient between your thighs so that you hold them so they do not faint, and then you extract the tooth according to rectitude in a way that does not shake it, nor does the patient experience major pain.
And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then because you complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen those extremities with subtle roots so that it is not trapped at the time of your construction on that root.
And because you operate exceedingly in the scarification of the entire circuit of the gingiva and guard with your strength so that it does not shake and breaks apart from it, and return to the patient for the wickedness that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what foolish ignorant barbers do in their obstinacy and audacity over the eradication of them, for they do not administer what we have recommended; because many voids come about on the bad teeth, great difficulties which are more intricate than those that are trapped, and the roots of them all removed, or some of those, or that you extract from the osses of the mandible thus as many voids have testified.
And then the eradication of it is washed with vinegar in water or agreeable salt.
And if you induce fluxes of blood for that, thus as many voids induce, then you will try a certain quantity of wine and aspersion on the wound, and if it does not confer that wine, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and threads are subtle as those which are faintly moved at the beginning to extract the tooth, with a long handle and short, thick, so that they are not doubled when you must operate.
And thus as many times of thick handle until when you stretch them, they are not doubled, they are short extremities.
And they are made of Indian iron, decently made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth which some enter into others and stretch for strong construction, and some voids in the extremities of those are in the form of a bird's beak, which has the name of cicónia, so it is guarded, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter xxvi.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of osses from the trapped mandibles.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is trapped for some reason, then because you pause on the spot where it is bound for a day or two until the spot becomes mollified; and then you insert the instruments or threads of those which are assembled like the beak of a bird called cicónia or guarded, in the form of forceps:
The external remedies of their pain are made from these herbs cum lime or alfalfa.
And if you do not obey this experiment with these forceps or tenaculas, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has an atlas-like name, so it is a small lever of which the shape is like this.
It should be a short, thick extremity, and not be bent so that it does not get tired.
Therefore if the root is perforated, it is good; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
And now you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form approaching the following. and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled to an eye-sized granule, and this is the form.
of the triangular extremity, curved or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it does not get tired.
And another thing you know is that the instruments for teeth are moved similarly and likewise the other instruments.
The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the mate's second opinion according to what it signifies about the operation and various diseases; because they are among the diseases that the ancients did not diagnose or pause with proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are tired, or if they are weak, then it is necessary to operate on that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form.
And it should be with some small thickness little by little, and be held or kept in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is perforated; and then restore the place with convenient medicines according to that.
If there is small weakness in the bone, then scrape that from the weakness and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When the prominent teeth are not according to their natural shape for those, then it is shameful, and especially when it comes to women, and especially to venerable elderly people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not in proportion to another tooth, and it is not possible to straighten or align it, then root out that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you extract it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's jaw, and made from Indian iron of extremely sharp extremity.
And it should be your extraction with which you extract it in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form.
And it should be all of Indian iron and the edge is sharpened; and it should be with many small points thus like a file in which they are made agitated, in which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is joined and falls. And then polish it in the file, and scrape it with a razor's edge.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is tired and hinders the tongue, then it is necessary that you file it until the asperity of that fracture is stopped and smoothed, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not lead or the speech does not corrupt.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold filings or silver.
When it happens to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the disease cannot be strengthened on what it affects, and you have treated it with medicinal powders, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that it does not become infected in those that are strengthened with gold filings and not silver, because silver becomes verdigris and is weakened after a few days, but gold at no time is altered.
And it should be the gold in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosities of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the web of the healthy tooth from the other part. And then iterate the treatment until the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not decayed.
And your constriction is the one that strengthens the veins of the teeth, which do not decay.
Then you insert the superfluous roots of the tooth with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each place in gestures, and convert them into occult ones between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue. Then you release that thus strengthened with a Roman lock.
Maybe it is dislocated or broken, strengthen it or them in another tooth in such a manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of two healthy teeth and of two decayed ones, thus as they are bound together at times.
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and are re-implanted thus as they had been recounted, and remain there.
And do not do that unless you are skilled craftsmen and wise.
And some remedies are suitable for a cause of the cow's bones, and it is done in their form as a tooth shape, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the incision of the ligament which you find in the tongue and prohibits speaking.
This ligament which you find below the tongue sometimes grows naturally in men, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, the existing sky in the tie; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Maybe in that there is some hardness or induration, and that has been established by consolidation of the wound, then you cut with a lancet and separate it according to the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
And beware that there is not a fracture in the region of the flesh and that you do not cut into an artery or vein, causing a flow of blood.
And then you wash the remains of the incision with warm water or wine, or with warm fresh water; and then you pause below the clean tongue; thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue below their tongue at any time so that it does not consolidate another wound.
Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood, stop on the vitriolic place thrice; maybe if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this. And then you cure the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 35.
About the extraction of a ranula below the tongue.
Some remedies happen below the tongue, an abscess similar to a small swelling, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that thing that is cancer.
And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on him, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you stop three times above, thus it is vitriolic, until the blood is restrained.
And then you return to your work until you have treated it with the complement of him, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that with another cure suitable for this, until it is healthy.
Chapter 36.
About the extraction of abscesses from two ears and of those that are nothing in the gullet and of other abscesses.
When they occur in the gullet, then they are glands that are assembled together, which happen beforehand and are called two ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healthy, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that thing with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; before you let it mature, and then you can extract it, or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on him is to consider, during your operation, if it has already rested the abscess of him with complete rest or if it has been diminished with some diminution; and then do seize the patient in front of the sun, and his head is in the sky, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue of him below with an instrument most noble of which this is the form.
It should be made of silver or copper, and be subtle as a knife.
Then, as you press upon the tongue and show it to him, and touch upon that tie which is beneath, then take nine and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the divided parts as much as you can. Another thing that pulls out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing that pulls out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the interior of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And since you have incised one mole, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient's gurgling throat with cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, gurgle with water from the decoction of scorched millet or of myrtle leaves, and similarly to those of the stiping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it until it is healthy.
And some vegetables, namely in the gourd of other apostemes, have other golden leaves, and incise them according to what you did and said in the incision of two moles simultaneously.
And you have already medicated a woman with an aposteme which was born in the gourd of it, which aposteme tended to turn dark-colored, with little sensation, which had already closed the gourd of it, and the woman breathed with great straining, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was about to die if you hadn't stayed there for a day or two.
And the aposteme had so strongly swollen that it had formed two ramps inside which they would issue through two tracts.
Then you examine it carefully and place it in one of their corners, and pull it out, and insert it into the large portion, and then you incise it to comprehend the other tract, and then you obstruct its mouth, and comprehend its tongue, and then you place it in that corner of the aposteme.
And then you remove a large part of it, and nothing flows from it except a little blood. Then the gourd of that woman is absolutely clear, and she begins to drink water, and then you take a walk, so you didn't cease to incise that aposteme many times for a long time, and the aposteme succeeds in its place, which is prolonged until it is finished.
Then you begin to cautery and cauterize the gourd of it, then thus of addition; and then you take a walk, and do not know that God did that miracle, and I myself did it.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a hernia when it is apostematized.
When the hernia descends to the hollow, and it is apostematized and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not correspond, and sometimes it happens that the aposteme is cauterized because it has stayed subtle, then it is necessary to incise that which is accumulated round; and if it is at that length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its sentiment, then it is necessary to temper the incision of it, because there is fear about the patient.
And when you sometimes follow the method that you have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient seize with his tongue an instrument of which the process follows its form, and then place it in the new corner, and pull it out below, and incise it with one of two instruments which are said in the incision of two moles.
And it is necessary that you do not incise it except what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you incise it more, you will ruin its natural speech.
And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two moles, and cure it until it is healthy.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, it is necessary to use skill in the cauterization of it with fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the tieu seat, and then take the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and it corresponds to this living cause, and pause it not sparse nor subtle, and of that fills the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
The external application of the cavity where medicine is placed as if it were a conquavitat of a hernia, and place the instrument on the medicine over the womb, and the patient will spit out saliva or mucus from their mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no disturbance occurs on the throat of the patient and that they do not despair because of that cause.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express that over the uvula for a space of half an hour until it becomes disintegrated and settled by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the hernia, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the hernia into the cotton through a canal until the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the hernia, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you indicate that you have tried the medicine, try it again, and then apply the cauterization by removing the cotton from the border, and modify what is in the circuit of the hernia with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand with embrocation, and remove any bitterness until it is healthy.
And this type of cure is more salvaging than incision and longer in terms of time.
Some wounded are cured by the uvula with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origan, rue, Arabic scicados, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them steep in vinegar and boil; and the bowl should be well-washed with decent water, and placed in a middle location of the bowl, a traverse above which an instrument conquau is placed, made of silver or copper.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapour reaches the uvula through the tube, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
And then try it on many wounded until it is dry, and be careful that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not think that you are doing it, but rather declare the abscess of the patient to be cautious.
But if the instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of one closed in a hood, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed hood prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of spines and of what adheres to the throat and other causes.
Many wounded adhere to the throat or spine of feet or some other cause.
Then you will know that you extract what is apparent, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you will know that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient has eaten a piece of raw turnip or radish or a dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed, and tie it strongly with thread, and then translate the patient through this, so that when you perceive the place in which the spines are extracted, then it will be forgotten. And take an eel and bind it with thread, and place it on the table and let it be extracted; or take a porpoise and let its meat and fat be extracted, and let its entrails be cleansed.
But if it is not forgotten through those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is more gross than a small radius, and in the extremity of the hernia which you insert into its throat with facility.
And elevate the ague to its highest point, and be careful that the touch of the sieve bone of the throat, so that it does not harm the body or what pierces the bone or spine, or what the doctor places on their hand.
But I think that the patient who inserts it is worse, because of their knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pierces within, and pulls their hand with the instrument in them, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forgotten.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood accumulated in the throat.
When blood is medicated in what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforts, consider then in the throat of the patient at sunrise, because you have comprehended the tongue of the patient with an instrument which you have recommended.
Therefore, if you want to extract that small amount of blood or subtly and gently gesture underneath.
And if it is not possible for you to extract that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's groin area, and place the end of the cannula in the cavity of the ignited iron, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is finished and the patient is freed from the groin area) and abstain from giving the patient any drink for a whole day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, and place the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with that; and do not hesitate for any reason and give them water an hour afterwards, because the bloodletting is almost complete when they feel the water very cold.
Moreover, if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cumin or aniseed per the instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, for it is four days.
And it is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is to take a pipe on which are ignited coals and the pipe is covered with a covering in the middle of which there is a tube; and then give below the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodletting, because the bloodletting will take four days.
And if it does not take effect, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drinks, and eat salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen is not forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting is treated from the groin area when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it has some curvature: which is placed on the groin area, and its end is similar to a beak of a stork, which is hollow, in which there is a small opening, so that, when you grasp something, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of theirs, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs through two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and because of what is comprehended about the humors.
And the second manner is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess on the head is different from an abscess on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its judgment for operation.
And many abscesses are such that they require not to be perforated but rather maturation of the Sania in those or completion of theirs.
So other abscesses are those that require to be pierced when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, like abscesses that are close to the joints, because an abscess when it reaches a joint, its essence is prolonged until it pours out what is in its circuit, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, you will harm the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore pierce what has not matured; and do not require to pierce crudely, from incomplete digestion, but only that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not pour out its essence and it is elongated to the internal parts of the buttocks, and makes a fistula, or it becomes in the term of it what is not healthy. You should know the time for piercing the abscess, and thus it is when it matures.
And you know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the reduction of fever, and also the diminution of redness and of pulsation, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And because you should know that piercing is done in the place where pus is beneath the abscess and comes out for healing from the eminence.
And piercing is always done for the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all hollow places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Moreover, when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay piercing until digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; because if you pierce it then, it is prolonged the body of the pouring out and much foulness, and strongly endures the lips of it and the profundity of it.
Sometimes abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or of the body that needs treatment, or according to which member is injured.
And it is necessary to administer small perforations, and in large abscesses a large and ample or moderate section according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which it is necessary that the cord be constricted and enclosed, when it is done thus, and it is done in term that has already been established, thus as that which occurs in troops of dubléc and of buboes.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as the figure of the leaf of myrtle, thus as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those in which a round section is administered and a lunar section, and they resemble those.
Sometimes that which does not have a head thus as are superficial abscesses of the lion, it is necessary to perforate that with a superficial perforation, or only plane alone.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much sania, that you perforate it and do not touch it so as to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then place the abscess within another day, and then extract a greater part, and then make those evacuations gradual according to the graduation until it is forgotten.
And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or very old and decrepit, because the animal spirit is much resolved in the egress of the sania, and it strengthens the patient, and you open them.
And beware of this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, so that you abstergescas the wounds and consider thus if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat section, then you administer the qualguas of oil or of coto antic; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause in some traction until they pervenguan ensemps.
And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been cut off or has concaved into the circuit, then it is necessary that you complete it with much coto or thread made from the cloth of oil, thus as when one has treated pans or razizos, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to cure it and heal what needs to be healed of the enguentz until it is sanitized.
Sometimes if there is a flow of blood during the hour of your operation, then you administer cold water and wine in those which mingle with a cloth of oil, and place that over the area of the flow of blood very gradually.
Sometimes if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure, and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our own book and division.
Sometimes if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices with wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be cold until the third day, thus as we have said, and then it is necessary that you dislodge the abscess and abstergescas it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
And thus it is necessary to know the cure of abscesses universally, sometimes according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is possible to cure it per capita singularly.
Chapter 41.
About the section of abscesses which come on the cord of the head.
On the cord of the small head abscesses, and it is about species of nodes which contain tunics that are there in fact; and the species of them are many.
And they are pungent, and those that contain humidity resemble a lime. And those that contain humidity resemble pears, and they are similar to them; and those that are lumpy, are hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those that do not have fear, as one must extract those that do not make counter-irritation.
And the operation in section of those is that you sprinkle those with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Because if it contains humidity, then you separate that into sections according to the longitude for a superficial section according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line of .B. until the line of .G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that because it contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of all, because many gradual returns, if it remains from some cause.
And then you should immerse the affected area in a warm Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and otherwise, in water and salt; and fill the plague with that which enters into another day, because for that corrodes all so that it removes the roughness of that skin.
And then you should apply the Egyptian ointment repeatedly to that affected area secondly and thirdly, if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there will be no roughness due to any cause of that skin; then cure the plague with the ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you should cut into that following this method: You make a cross-shaped incision in the form of a crown, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape out all the affected part, and extract your virtue from the outer layer which contains it.
Maybe if you have made a counter-opening, then do so that you can first reintegrate the primary opening.
And similarly, you make an opening in the abscessed area of incision and of cure according to what I have told you; and making an incision over the abscessed area is less troublesome, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some veins are so close to these abscesses which are in the head of certain men whose veins are not humid; this causes because you have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus with a rough, asperous, white, which could not be touched, and if some were about that percussion, it would plague.
Maybe in other accidental abscesses on the head there is no such capital, thus as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and deviate from the roots of the ears, maybe the incision of all these should be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those of the affected part below the skin so that it is alleviated, and the body of the sanity is at the lower affected parts.
And then cure those with what is convenient for that cure.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Some swollen abscesses occur on the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some swollen ones occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all the scrofula of those is within its own proper tunic, and thus as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as I have recommended.
And the species of these scrofula are many, because some of them are lapidous, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find with good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is malleable to all parts, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not pendent, so that you should incise superficially on the upper part of the body under the line of G., until the line of B., and scrape out all parts, and extend two lips of the codena to eleven, or many eleven if you need those, thus as I have said about the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
And it is a space not very narrow, that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that it irritates the malaute, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause on the veterinary plague treated with ointments or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and lay it there until the acuity of the abscess is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purulent. When the blood is abstracted.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then investigate whether there is any cause of the other small scrofula, so incise those and clean them.
And if it is at the root of the large scrofula vein, then beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its root. Beforehand beware that you do not make that wound double-fold strong and that you leave it until it falls by itself, if it is not annoying.
And then fill the plague with old oil which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the plague and cauterize as much as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Sometimes it happens that the abundance of scrofula has overflowed due to its greatness, so you should understand how to insert the root of it, and separate it and administer a suitable treatment.
And in those scrofulous lesions that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the site of maturation, and stop the perforation of what seems to be the pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
Then administer perforation, or something similar that seems suitable to those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound has been cleaned, then you cure it with suitable generating flesh that grows inward so that it may be healed.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the pilum of the accidental aposteme that occurs in the groin.
The ancients made this section in the epilhot, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has made it like that.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Sometimes in men there is awkwardness, because the extraction of the epilhot should be avoided, since it would not be done juvenally for as long as all the veins and major parts of the thighs are here.
Sometimes in those who have abscesses cut into the mouth or groin or two auricles, when the malady is not in the dog, because they use the section of epilhot to flee from the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should insert the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood that are near.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then it happens that he extends the cord of the groin to the ankle, and then inserts the cord inward so that it reaches the canal, but avoids the blood vessels if you see any of those causes.
And then insert the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux that comes from that exit, which is of the disrupted body and for the abscession of the foot.
And thus the wound remains open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew only that sole to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow inward so that it may be healed.
And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is an exposition that it is not only that you see that some of these apostemes have already operated on the groin of the thigh, and the thigh has come near to death, and its wings are between the thighs, and some go to insert the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the site of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
And for that reason I command to leave the wound open until the evil of the malady is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command thus the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my own experiments is that a servant held a knife and put it in the right groin and inserted it into a part of the dog's lung, and I was called to cure it, and I began to touch the pus as it came from the dead, and I discovered the wound and touched the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Therefore I must confess that it had not inserted a vein or guided, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if he did not recover in the foot, and then some days returned to the administration of his own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the section on abscesses that occur in the groin beforehand, and it is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess named hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, there is no need to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners of which the one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by nodulation of an artery, and in that there is fear. And I do not think that it makes a presumption about him like iron except in the one that is small. And you probe that and investigate it with the said method, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you insert it thus like the nodes, and extract it from what contains the skin and bursicle; and if not, then all the essence of the being is scrutinized, and then I cure the place with what is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
On the section of species of knots.
The knots have many species and you already said all the species of them in the division.
And then I will recommend that you examine the difference between a knot and an excrescence with a dubious surface.
So you say that an excrescence is a condition of heat and fever and vehement pains until the inflammation of the excess is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
But a knot does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains a certain thick fluid which is like a sac proper to it.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a wound and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, which are either fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what you said in the division.
So then, when you approach the cure of a knot, you expose that one and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called introèmes, according to what will be seen in its form in the chapter which is about to come.
And it is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity which you found in the abscess, and you turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
And then ultimately you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introèmes and consider what has been left in the residue of it.
And if the current humidity has been forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise on the surface section according to what I said about the other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity in the residue of the introèmes, then you know that it is fat.
And cut above it with a cross-sectional form according to this form: Thus as you are taught, and suspend it with onions, and clear the entire part to facilitate, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, above it and extract that sania from the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many times it happens that way, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of it.
Because if nothing remains of it, little or too much, the knot returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the treatment with some corrosive powders and strengthen the treatment, and pause over that which is an abscess caution, and cure another from the other treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a large knot, then you cut the two lips of it and cure that which incarnates there.
But if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then you touch and fill the place of the three-part ointment which is veterinary and leave it on for two days or for three until the plague subsides and the inflammation of the wound ceases; and then return to incise that which has been removed from the knot.
Chapter 46.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the introèmes, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
The form of the large introème is this:
The form of the small introème is this:
Made of iron, of alloy, with curved extremities decently, so that they fix the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
And they are of three species, which are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experience, its form is:
The form of the medium experience, its form is:
The form of the small experience, its form is:
It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and excrescences and fistulas and bubos, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
And they are made of roots, thick ones, wounds, thus as large agulhas that are situated in the seats, and they are made of iron citrine, or of iron, or of steel, or of silver; And the best ones are when they are made of iron citrine.
And they are made of the experience of black plum, which ones are adapted to the fact that for those there are opened fistulas in the conquest of those which are reflected, and they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
And they are of three species, which some of them are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its structure.
Form of an experienced great remedy:
Form of an experienced better remedy:
Form of an experienced small remedy:
The forms of the anointments are from many special species, because among those are some simple alcoves, which have only one curvature, and of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of their own anointments, and of three species.
And of those anointments that have two curvatures, and of three species.
And of their own that have three curvatures, and of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple anointment, form of it:
Form of a large anointment that has two curvatures: Form of a medium anointment that has two curvatures: Form of a small anointment that has two curvatures:
Form of a large anointment that has three curvatures:
Form of a medium anointment that has three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three species, because among those are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those are which are made sharp and the other extremities not-sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather to be used gently in the excision of nodes, for fear of incision of vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be healthy and achieve tranquility, and also to avoid disturbing the adhesion which disturbs the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, also as they appear.
There are many sorts of ointments and they resemble each other, which is made from aloes.
And it is in the pointed extremity of the spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and beforehand, when you want, also as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are used to remove the debris from the abscesses and do not harm the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping glasses which remove the flow of blood, and they are of three species; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
There are many sorts of citrus ointments, rounded ones with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of cupping glasses are large, medium, and small, so that they can remove the flow of blood with speed as needed, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
However, one does not use them to remove blood from every part of the body, and one uses them only in fleshy areas, such as on the muscles of the arms and legs, and on the flesh of the chest and abdomen, and similarly to those fleshy areas.
And some evacuated areas are made from those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy, or there is incision of a vein or artery.
And some evacuated areas are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Some evacuated ones are swollen breasts of some men who have the habit of sleeping with their arms like pillows, and thus they swell the breasts, and they are similar to the breasts of women, and Roman apostemoses, leaves.
And to the one who suffers from that, it is necessary to incise those with lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excise the entire ugliness, and then fill the wound with medicated carnation, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is within so that they may be healthy.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude also as it does in women, then it is divided into two lateral sections plus sub- sections, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then excise the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which covers the inflammation of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the gap of the cut under the corroding gum and remove that which corrodes the root of the grayish nail, and then cure that which will be healthy.
Chapter 48.
About the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are a type of scrofula, harsh, which contain a pus that is sacred.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the liquid has been evacuated from the abscess of the sania, then you complete the cut well and leave the entrance open for another day.
And then the cut should be dressed and cared for in a conveniently absorbent way, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess of the species of the nodes is, and of the scrofula, then you should make an incision above that area as we have said in the section about scrofula incisions.
If the wound is extended to such an extent that it becomes putrid, then administer a cautery according to what we have previously mentioned about that.
Chapter 49.
About the incision of abscesses that are caused by arteria or vein.
When the artery is broken, and the code is consolidated which is above that, then many veins are caused to produce an abscess. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through the artery, it is often aggregated in the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
And that which is through the vein is reflected in the obvious manifestation of the body.
And the incision about this abscess is erroneous, and it increases in those that are beneath the wings, and in the corners, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to eschew its cure, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary to avoid.
Maybe about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, an incision should be made in the code at the front; and then the incision should be widened with a knife and the artery should be opened, and the tunics should be removed until it is discovered.
And then place a thread about that needle and make it penetrate until the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double ligature in two places, — which causes you to have a surgical technique for extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
And then puncture the place where two ligaments are spaced apart until the blood flows out of it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer a cure in which it is generated pure until the ligaments fall; and then take care of that which is conveniently adapted to that until it is healthy.
And if it is an abscess by incision of a vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in the code, and then insert the needle beneath the place where you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be in double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with a good ligature according to what I have told you about the ligature of the grape, which is on two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Maybe if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread into the needle beneath all the abscess, from the incision of the primary needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is situated that which is in it, then you incise the superficies of the code, and remove that which is linked to it.
And then pause about the pus which has submerged in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with warm compresses and conveniently adapted until it is healthy.
Chapter 51: About the abscess that is caused by twisting of nerves.
Thus it is caused by abscess in arteries and veins, and similarly it is caused by abscess in the nerves when it is caused by their percussion or excessive trembling, and by similarity.
And it is made in the manner of it in the places of the adjutants or of the ankle, or in every place where the joints are flexible.
And it is a severe abscess, and it is similar to the color of another body, and it is in the major dispositions of its own laws when it is straitened with vehemence, feeling in it a similar stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore it is beneath the code, and it has been divided into total parts and does not go to the previous or following parts.
Therefore, it is not surprising that those who are in joints do not want to be inflamed with iron, because strong contraction of the limbs occurs.
Perhaps he who is on the head or on the forehead feels the codeina in the spatula. Maybe it is a small abscess, then you have the forces and remove that from the roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it in a hook, and excavate that, and then stop that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Headache.
From the section of the abscess that comes down from the chest to the stomach.
It happens to some people who have putrefied matter in their stomachs and in other parts of the body that are called fungal abscesses due to similarity with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and already their lips are altered, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in their stomach there were two abscesses that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white things, of small roots.
And already their lips were turned inward and split, and humidity flowed from that entire time.
Then I inspected them and made an incision in one of the feet, about 18 ounces. and the other about 6 ounces.
And the operation on the incision of their wounds is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, of subtle roots; then you make a wide incision with a spatula, and you are in your presence with cauteries at the focus, because many putrefied matters are expelled from the section of the patient; and if you find the sanies, cauterize them.
And if the patient is poor and timid, beware of incision with iron; rather then take a piece of recently melted lead, and strengthen it on that tissue, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust it on the structure of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead grain in the tissue, until it is absorbed and falls through its own effort.
Maybe it is of large roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the stomach.
Maybe it is possible that you make an incision on its death, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healthy.
And beware that you do not presume to incise the tissue that is of dark color, of little sensation, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I find it in remembrance of cancer and also similarly.
Headache. ii.
About the treatment of the prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the stomach, and sometimes the web or intestine according to how it ends in other ruptures; or by sanies that flow from a vein or artery as it has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Maybe it is due to a fissure of the ciphac and by movement of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a gentle pain, and then appears in diverse situations. And if it is due to egress of the intestine, then the situation of that is in water that we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and as you press on that with your fingers it is occultated, and then returns; and strong is the case, and it is magnificent with many introits of bath and vehement effort.
Maybe it is due to humidity, then it is gentle and not occultated when you press on it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to sanies, then at that time the abscess appears black and declining.
Maybe it is due to bad flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Maybe it is due to ventilation, then the touch of it is gentle.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to sanies of artery, or of vein, or due to ventilation; then you must be prohibited from the treatment of it, because in that there is fear and pain also as you have seen in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to artery and vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the web, then you must command the patient to hold their belly still, and it must be standing extended; and then make a sign with your hand in the circuit of the whole navel, and then command them to stand turned inward between their hands placed above the belly, and then circulate with a wide spatula in the circuit of the navel above the place where you have made the sign with your hand; and then extend the death of the abscess to the parts below an inch large; and then tie in the circuit with a strong thread or chain and the manner of the liar's decent treatment.
And if you have already extended the membrane of the aposteme over the ligament and inserted the thin thread into that index finger, and if you did not touch or guard the ligament, then you extract the hardened area and push back the intestine to its proper place in the abdomen.
And if you have touched the web, then take a pinch of that uncleanness; and cut away the excess flesh from it.
Perhaps it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that word, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit which has made a circle around the aposteme in many ways of crossing, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the aposteme in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area inside where the extended flesh will collapse by itself; or cut away what is subtle and will collapse, and then cure that uncleanness which comes from the abscesses inside so that it may be healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the aposteme thus as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which it attracts in itself, and then cure that uncleanness which comes from it and consolidates the area.
Chapter 53.
On the Cure of Cancer.
We have spoken, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it is possible to reach the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid in the cure not to make it worse so that it does not ulcerate; and we have spoken of cancer generated in the marrow and caution of its cure.
And we have said that some ancient physicians thought that certain rooted cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similarly in the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Perhaps when it is ancient and grave, it does not seem that you can appropriate it to yourself, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been brought to that.
And the operation on it is what has been allocated thus as we have said, that you should precede and leave the bad humor and purge away the black bile of certain rooted ones, and then you will know that, if it is a manifest replenished repetition.
And then prepare the bad humor with preparation in which place it is located for operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncis those that go to that; and then concave all parts of the code so good for perexcrutacio inside that no remainder of any cause of its roots. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightness, and express the places, and remove the thick blood entirely from your hand or instrument in which it is possible for you to use of the instruments.
Perhaps if you have counterflow of thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that inside so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that uncleanness with another cure so that it may be healed.
Chapter 54.
On the Cure of Hydropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not only the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of hydropsy timpanistre with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the bad humor has already been debilitated, or it is in that other bad humor another hydropsy, thus as it is in the whole body or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Perhaps if you have the bad humor of exuberant virtue, and in it there is no other bad humor but only hydropsy, and not childish nor old, then the manner of operation on it is that you elevate the bad humor between your breasts, and the minister then presses the belly of it with his hand, filling the water at the lower part of the navel, and then takes a spatula spiny according to this form:
It is of two sharp points long, of sharp extremity thus as spatula; perhaps however it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation on that it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropsy is from part of the intestines, because then it is necessary that you section yourself alone at the navel for the quantity of three fingers to the lower parts, in the direction of the navel above the pubic area.
Perhaps if the generation of hydropsy is due to bad humor of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
If the generation of it is through the mixture, then your section should be in the right direction.
And do not cover that your section should be above the rib above which you want to make a massage for that area, so that the superfluities do not flow back to that free place.
Then perform with the instrument throughout the entire code, and enter into that section, and elevate your hand on the spatula between the code and the siphac, and you extract it; and if the quantity of an ounce or surrounding.
Then perform the siphac until it reaches the spatula to the desired place, and that is the place of the evacuation. Then extract it and introduce an instrument whose shape is this: and it is similar to a silver canal subtle; it is made of silver or copper or golden alloy, at which in the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is the extremity of the instrument inserted according to the manner of a feather, thus sometimes.
And at the upper extremity of it there is a small handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that tiny amount descends onto the instrument, thus evacuating the water at the right moment in the proper quantity, because if you evacuate more than that at the wrong time, it will greatly harm the patient by resolving the animal spirit, or it approaches the fifth crisis which is near death.
You evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue of the pulse and the goodness of the patient indicate to you.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it, because it is retained so much by the code that retains the tube which is above the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perform it according to that manner.
Then try the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it sometimes, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for several days on an empty stomach, and beware of error so that you don't leave too much water behind.
But if you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water, then cure that which is buried in hot sand, and cover it with a cloth, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mixture and the fatigue as you have recounted in that which precedes regarding the extraction of water.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of children who are born with non-perforated urinary places.
Some born children are thus from the womb of their mother and the top of their mixture is not perforated (or the tube is straight or not in its place).
Then it is necessary to make a perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very subtle spatula according to this form:
And then stop in the tube a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass three days or four.
And when one wants to urinate it remains and hurts; and then return that.
And if you do not stop the lead, already it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not leave this clarity.
But that of which the tube is straight should be medicated with a lead key, thus as we have said, for several days until it is amplified.
But those in which the tube is not in its place, are led astray, because of that, he who is born and the tube is deviated from the end of the virgin head so that it cannot urinate to the divided parts, until it elevates the virgin to its hand to the upper parts; and it is not according to generation, for thus the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient is placed on their back, and then extend the head of the virgin to your left hand with vehement extraction, and insert the head of the virgin's head into the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, thus as it is inserted like a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the virgin appears similar to the head of the virgin and the tube falls into its proper place according to what is necessary.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times accidents happen there; and stop at the moment when you absolve the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of those who suffer in the prepuce at the head of the virgin and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the head of the virgin.
Many born children suffer from this treatment on the virgin and it is an emergence of great flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Here is the translation:
And if it is malignant, by the law of color, then you should administer cautery at the incision site and according to its root.
But if it is in the foreskin of the penis, uncircumcised, and one part of it is buried in the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove that which is buried from the beginning so that it is consolidated; and then you cure what is outside, because when you cure what is inside, it is not assured that it will not be troubled.
And also accidents happen in the genitals and in the black and corrupted foreskin, therefore you should conquer all that which is already denigrated and wants to corrupt or has been corrupted; and then apply liniments over that which is good, which is contaminated with the powder of scorched millet and of bitter roots and crumbles.
And then heal it with another cure so that it may be healthy.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery in this form:
because juvenile cautery is at two opportune moments, namely a flow of blood and the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed entirely at that hour, then you should introduce into the middle of the foreskin a pipe of lead so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only happens in one whose foreskin is so, and upon it no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or aposteme) you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely liberated from all parts.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those exquisite things, then you should scrape with a spatula for some reason of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a subtle drawing, which has already been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
And then it should be cured with a six-day stipation so that it may be consolidated.
Chapter 47.
On the purification of children and the cure of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuity thus with the other plagues: but we will rather do it with our own operation and will, and those of that sort are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign a better operation and a more gentle path to health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their writings, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation, which causes us to have discovered the majority of artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a new and torrid method; and they use ligament with faith and incision with the nail.
And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not discover better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because many times the code escapes downwards, because the code of the foreskin has two tunics, and one tunic is below, and therefore it is forced to another incision and sure pain. And in the purification which is done by alphabetic method, and is digital, which the sabatiers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not assured, because it goes inside the channel of it.
But in the operation with the nail, therefore you should beware of iron and corrupt your own operation. And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it is seen in such a way that there is no need for purification, and you have already seen that.
But from the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with faith, goodness, experiment discovers in me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which the acuity that is below is thus with the acuity that is above; and therefore as you premise your hand so proportioned to two acuities, and incise accordingly in a single time; and it is made compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the penis of all parts, in which no error can be found.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you do not do anything but place your faith in its penis only thus, and that you leave it until another day.
And then you should try to cheer him up in that entire manner which is possible for you to receive his intelligence. And then you should have him sit between your arms steadfastly prepared, and do not be without caution; and hide the forceps in your hand or place them near the thigh, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the patient's groin and feel in the cavity, and pull that inside so that it exits the head of the groove, and then declare what is accumulated there from the patient's dirt.
The shape of the forceps is for declaration, this is the shape:
Some of the extremities are not-aligned and the others are aligned, so that they don't reach the branch of the nail, and their length is like the length of two bent fingers together.
The mistake in declaration is because you forcefully opened the entire internal cavity, or partly removed it from its insertion.
So you should extend that of your hour to your finger in the apostemic position of the place and insert it according to equal equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
But if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflamed below the apostemic groove, then let that enter so that the cautious aposteme may be calmed, and excavate that which has been facilitated, and insert it according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the groove, lest you hurt yourself with it.
And then take care to consolidate that wound with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted into the cavity with measure, and you observe the parts above, that does not harm him.
And take care to heal that wound as we have said, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by inflammation or by flesh, and it resembles those things that we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in that which we have said, the vehement cause is made above the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and its nozzle should be subtle, like a canal of a small bird's feather, subtle in length like a ray of a long palm and half, on which there should be a subtle cane at the head of it.
And the manner of injection of urine for that is to take the doubled thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good liaison; and you insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syringe, and you insert them with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but then introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you enounce the syringe at the border and at the album of oil.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and envelop the bladder with it and the groove in olive oil and oil of roses.
And then insert the syringe to facilitate it so that it reaches the root of the groove; and then double the groove below at the part of the navel; and then you fill the syringe with that; and then you fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and this thing makes the patient be free from the vain cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the opposite, where it goes to tortuousness.
And gradually stretch out the little finger on the small wool, because the urine dries the wool.
And extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a circle, do not cease to make that and use a circle until the bladder and the patient's trouble are alleviated.
Chapter 6.
About the quality of evacuation of the bladder with a clenched hand and similar instruments which are suitable for that.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is constricted by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make use of an instrument called a clenched hand, and this is its form.
but on the outside of it is a tube, so it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes also another time.
At the beginning it is a concave place, in which is what is swallowed, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses it, until when some cause is withdrawn from the humidity, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clenched hand phlebotomize in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clenched hand into the humidity, and withdraw with that water which is swallowed from the above-mentioned parts, because the humidity is withdrawn into the cavity of the clenched hand.
And then insert the extremity of the clenched hand into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then swallow the humidity with that water which swallows, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle crystallizer by which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so small that it resembles a little feather, and afterwards the channel is gently bent.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the crystallizer into the rod.
And then stretch out your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its returning flexibility; and then insert a strong thread through those channels, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle so that it is also added to the saffron, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and olives and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and make it so that it is done as it was done in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 10.
On the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about the stone on which surgical operation is done by hand, and sectioning.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now present a clear and brief exposition.
So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects the elderly; and of its signs is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his rod, and many veins are gathered there, and then it is dressed; and in that water they make a hole in the cul-de-sac of those.
And it is a consolation for the health of the children of that until they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the old. But in the young it is half-cured because it is among those.
And of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which modifies the patient with a crystallizer which extracts all the filth that is in the two hollow vessels; because that filth some gathered veins prohibits the formation of the stone from the investigation of it.
And then the patient is pressed with the two feet and is constricted and massaged below so that the stone descends to the floor of the bladder, or jumps out of its place through some gathered veins.
And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and the hands of it are afterwards the whisks of it, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the below-mentioned parts.
And then thoroughly clean that entire area beforehand.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then you will touch it at once with a dry cloth over it.
And if you do not feel the entire toe at once, then put oil on the toe indicated by the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the ring finger if they are young and complete, and insert it into the hollow of the knee. And thoroughly clean the stone until it comes out from the said toe. And gradually bring that small thing down into the hollow of the bladder.
And then press above that on the said toe, and expel it through the parts in front of the place where you feel the dryness.
And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand between the genitals, and place their other hand remaining on the codename which is behind the genitals, in the part of the place where the dryness is felt.
And then insert the spatulum between the incident of which this is the shape of it: and divide the water that is between the knee and the genitals, not in the middle place, above the left thigh; and let the dryness be on that stone and the said toe, and let it be a transverse dryness, so that the dryness beforehand is wide and strongly stretched according to the quantity that you extract from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because too much compression of the said toe which has the stone would be forgotten, and it would be facilitated by its own deficiency.
And you will know that the stone is somewhere in which it has an angle and margins, because the evacuation of it is made difficult by that.
And in that water, it resembles a lens-like stone, and it is round, and it is difficult to evacuate it.
So if it is the one with angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, then you will arrange over that, or you will stretch over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on the one you stretch over the stone, and do not avoid it; or you will insert beneath it the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot reach it, then you will enlarge the tube a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a glass tristressed with vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you will push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over it; and then push a little further into the water; and similarly you would do if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you insert it with great dryness, because it harms the patient in one of two ways: either it kills or it prevents the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it from within until it is forgotten, or insert into the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and stretch it. And put on that wounded area an infusion of oil and wine, or oil rosated and cold water, so that the post-wound caution may be cooled.
And then rest the patient on their back, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
And when that is disturbed, moisten the place with water and much oil, and then heal it with a gentle icon and a gentle bazilicon until it is healthy.
But if in the wound apostema causes bad ulcers, and it is adjusted and corroded, and it seems thus as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and therefore the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of the blood with the urine), then insert the said toe into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply an opposite to all species, with what is convenient for it in terms of cure until it is healthy.
And see to it during all the hours of the entire cure that you read and adjust the medicines which are placed on the spot.
And if the stone is small and it is in the meat of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and the urine is prohibited, then cure it with what you recommend beforehand, because many vegetables are useful for this cure and are accused of dryness; and already you have spread it, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the shape of it:
of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed in a fist.
And take hold of the vein, and place it in that position on the rock so that it does not return to the bladder.
And insert the iron into the vein, making a perforation so that the perforator goes to that rock. And turn the perforator with your hand on that small rock little by little, and you will make the perforation of it so that the other part can penetrate; because the urine is almost absorbed.
And place your hand on that which is rough from the rock of the affected part before the vein, because it is bruised, and it is ulcerated in the urine, and the patient is healed.
Maybe this cure is not adapted to you for some cause that prohibits it, then place a vein beneath the rock, and another vein above the rock. And enclose the rock in that vein between two ligatures. And extract that one. And dislodge the ligament and clarify the congealed blood, which is done in the wound.
And it is not necessary to ligate the vein beneath the rock, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the vein is dislodged, the channel of the rock returns to its place and closes the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary to ligate the vein above, so that you elevate the channel to the upper parts, or it returns to its own complete complement, and closes the wound thus, as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stone from women.
A stone in women is rarely generated.
Maybe you see a stone in some of those, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman's foot is veined.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe the measurements of the doctor when it is cast, or they are of the married women having husbands.
The third is because you have not found a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with my hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the section on stone in women is far from the place of the stone, because it requires a deep incision, and there is fear.
Maybe you need to provoke you to that, then it behoves that you take a wise woman who knows how to extract, and few are skillful.
Maybe you are deprived of that, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the practice of women, or presents a mature woman who has knowledge in this art, or a woman who has a share of the art.
Then make that present, and command it to do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman is veined, then it behoves that you put your finger in her vagina and seek the stone.
Then if you find it, extract it beneath your finger, and then command it to insert above it.
Maybe if it is not veined, then command the matron to insert her finger in the conch of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends it with good comprehension.
Then if you find it, then it behoves that you gradually draw it away from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with your hand in a semicircle until you perceive it at the root of the thigh.
And then insert upon that supposition of the magnitude of the conch to the root of the thigh of whichever part is at its boundary and sent the stone in that part, and the finger of it is not removed from the stone extracted beneath it.
And the section is little at the beginning; and then insert the radius above that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from it.
And you know that the species of stone are many: because among them is small and large, and rough and smooth, and long and round, and having ridges.
Then you know how many species are of it for that which you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust at the vitreous place three times and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is ulcerated.
And make that you prepare with the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that they will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is inserted, then you stop powder on the place and strengthen that with pulvils and strict descent, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because soon the patient will die. And then heal the wound.
So when the sharpness of the blood is calmed down, then put on warm wraps, and at that place you will return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
About the section on hernia and cough.
Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the codena of the genitals containing the fluid, and it is named membrane.
And some fat women are in their own natural preparation of the fluid in the partition of the fluid, until it is known that it is another fluid; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not that but bitter.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which afflicts the genitals, because for those it is fundumental matter, and some old women are afflicted by percussion or a blow on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or bloody, or red, or it is black and foul, or it is whitish and pale, and that is what is worst.
And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess is red and declining a little in length, thus forming the figure of fluid, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all this from every part.
And if the humidity is in its own natural partition, then the abscess is red in the partition of the fluid and thus one estimates that it is another fluid.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white membrane, then you will find it below the sentiment.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the abscess within the entrails of the patient whose form is preceded; and according to what has been said in the vestige of the entrails, judge from that which has been defined.
So when we come to the cure of the iron wound, then it is fitting that we command the patient to be flebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the patient.
And then place a suppository on each of the two seats above some cause a little higher, and pause below the word drops.
And then place you on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its verge to one of two layers at the codena of the genitals and at the partition of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a wide spatula and separate the codena of the genitals from my middle place for the length until you reach the pentagonal.
And make a section according to the rectified engagement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white membrane comprehending.
And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not incise that; and your excavation is the one that excavates for partition thus far as it is suspended in the worst fluid and subtly scrutinized in the excavation according to the quantity at your possibility.
And then pierce the full membrane of water in a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labia of the section with uncials, and extend the membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the codena of the genitals comprehending, and incise the membrane in that manner which is possible for you. And incise that in its entirety or in pieces, and majorly widen the seat subtly, because if you do not scrutinize the incision of it exquisitely, it is not made securely so that the water does not return.
But if the fluid proceeds from that defect of its membrane at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the membrane, return to define that, and then adjust the two labia of the codena of the genitals with a suture, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, until it is sanctified.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another bad mixture, then it is fitting that you lift the vessels which are above the suspenders, and extract the fluid, and then heal that as well as we have mentioned.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that the two are hernias; therefore incise that part according to what has been done in the other engagement; and if it is at your sight that it is an operation, then you do it.
And then you purify the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged lana or in oily rose; and pause before another lana which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over two genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above drops double-weighted and pulvis, and tie those above with a liament which is according to this form:
And you should press two cloths and fill in the lanolin ointment according to this similarity; and fill in the extremities with those that are previously treated with cotton or lanolin humid, and add structure to the breeches of the breeches, and one extremity takes hold of the backside into the buttocks, and the second takes hold of the parting of the perineum, and two extremities over two thighs here and two extremities over two ankles, and the entire structure is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
Some hernias are artificially treated with cauteries in place of sectioning with iron; and it is that you take a cutellar cautery subtly and that you insert it into the code of the genitales, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until it is discovered the white ciphac containing water, and then you take the cautery according to this form. and it is assembled into a Greek letter.
And then pierce the ciphac, and it is ignited until all humidity is driven out.
And then extend the ciphac to inches, and scrape in inches, and scrape with a subtly ignited cautery; and insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the fire that it does not touch.
And know that this operation is more salvaging and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema in the hour of sectioning or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure which contrariety you make for yourself, with a curative treatment that convenes to him according to what is said.
Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended here; and it is when it is certified by you, because of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you elevate the patient on some elevated seat, and then pierce the apostema in the lower part of the body with a spatulum lat, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let it be a wide perception until all the water is drained out.
And then pause over the cold spot and lift it there, so that the remaining water drains out. And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Perhaps the contrariety is at the urgency of the water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except to quarrel with the white pannicol in the orrifice of the wound, which makes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water; then it is necessary that you put in the wound a penal instrument or one which extracts the water from the hydropits, in the form which precedes; or adjust on the opposite side of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and it is augmented for six months or in those environs; and when it is augmented, then it should be pierced according to that method of manipulation, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
On sectioning about fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the sectioning about this hernia, there is a persistent fear of losing a limb in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
And you are reminded of the operation on those and the species of the apostemas.
Therefore, I say that the apostemas are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: or for an acute sharp inflammation, which is poured out to the genitals, or for percussion.
And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy apostema.
And I have seen an apostema lapificada, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel pain.
And some hernias are made for swelling of the arteries, and for inflammation of those as well which I have perceived the remembrance of it, or for inflammation of veins.
Perhaps that which is for inflammation of arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the apostema when it comprehends those in the tender fingers; and it does not touch that.
Perhaps that which is made for inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it by any cause, unless the compression is in the fingers.
And it is possible that about this species a section is made and about the other carnals; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then stop the fire at the upper parts, and extract that from the white ciphac, and deliver the suspenders of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspenders so that you deliver that from all parts of the fire.
Therefore, if you have already consolidated those injured limbs, then it is necessary that you extract the patient and insert them into a warm place.
And if it is adhesion between some part of the hip, or between that which is between the pelvis, then it is necessary that you release all that adhesion and insert it for round incision.
Maybe it is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of it, and extract the patient thus as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then take care to heal that wound with another cure until it is healthy.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernia that occurs in childhood.
It is an abscess enveloped by some similar enveloping like a tumor with mollification of the testicles, and it is made difficult to exercise movement and walking on the affected limb.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is by fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
However, it is necessary to say that I will operate according to what the first authorities did.
And I say that it is necessary to place the affected limb on an elevated stool; and then apply padding to the suspensors of the testicles at the lower parts; and then you will hold the codena of the genitals with the ties that are tied to the pelvis, which are probable to be in a virgin state; and you have those other ministers who are assisting you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then insert a spatula to separate the agglutinated part by making a transverse section in the right of the veins, until the veins are discovered.
And then scrape out the entire affected part thus as you have said in extracting the roots of the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place them in those needles in which there is double faith, and tie it to the first of the places where life thrives, and tie another vein at the back of them. And then insert them in the middle place for right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added to the fetid and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure of other wounds in which you want to be healed, so that the veins, which are not nourished by one of the two genitals, may not become bad for that.
Maybe it thrives in all the pelvis, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are separated from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment for the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that it is separated for that so it does not grow youthful in those.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by section that ends in the extended hip over the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by giving way to the intestines of that rupture, it adds to the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the hip or of exhaustion of it, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the hip, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess gathered within until you feel the pain, so that the hip compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is by section of the hip, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing below the fallen codena, and that is by swelling of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the hip.
And some veins are forgotten in the intestine, and this intestinal hernia is called zigibal.
And some veins are made in the ventosity, and some veins run into the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is with great pertinacity of the illness, and some veins make evil pain and major worsening when it is premature.
And in the treatment of the species of this illness iron is used, for it is necessary that the cauterization be avoided in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the lower parts of its cavity if it obeys the usual return, and then it is invested over the column between the two hands, and raises the legs of it.
And then stop the codena which is the codena of the testicles at the lower parts, and insert the entire codena of the testicles for the length; and then place it in two labia of the section uncis according to what is necessary to close the section with those.
And if you section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to do, then from that the man may be restored.
Then scrape off that crust which you have on the vertebrae of the back, until the white crust is discovered from a certain part.
When you insert the finger into that which is the vertebra, in that which is between white crust, which is on the back of the man, and between the crust according to, and absorb with that adhesion which is in the part behind the man.
And then move the hand on the back of the vertebrae to the fore parts, and also extend the white crust with your left hand, and elevate the man to the crust at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the man thus and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind in a complete solution.
And search with your fingers to see if there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in the white crust. But if you find some cause, then you inject that into the belly below.
And then insert into the part below the back of the vertebrae for sectioning of that which flows pure and healthy blood, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligature which we have recommended (and some crusts of white crust are cauterized, which we have said, then the insertion of the tempestuous flux of blood, because many times it happens) and release the ligature until it falls by itself.
But if the healing of the wound is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with another cure of wounds until it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the cure of iron with him.
And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with us; which is to lift the vessels to the section above that man who has been facilitated by him; and then cut in the middle place around the abscess, so that the vessels fall.
And heal the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the dislocation that is done in the joints.
Some times it happens to rupture in the joints thus as we have said, and emerge from the place.
And they do not assign any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged in that, it is adjusted fissure in the crust until the intestine descends into the crust; and it happens thus for the extension of the crust which is in the joints as we have said, which causes because the crust is extended, and then it is mollified and the place becomes abscessed and emerges.
And the cure of him is by cautery thus as it has preceded the narration of him.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between his two hands, and then cut the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerges in section for the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white crust that is on the back until it is discovered.
And then take the rod and pause it over the prominent place of the crust, and press it to the prominence of the belly.
And then kiss the two prominent places over the extremity of the rod of the crust, and adjust to the suture one with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the rod, and do not insert anything into the crust at all, nor extend the man, nor any other cause thus as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then you should treat that wound with the cure of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, clarify and restore the wounded area until it is consolidated; because the scar is contrary and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
The cautery is better in this place, for it is more suitable for health.
Chapter 68.
About the softening of the cod (testicles).
The cod (testicles) of some men is softened in certain ways because it is softened by the fat that is between them, and it is affected by their attention.
It is necessary for one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie according to his two hips, and incise the entire cod which is softened above the natural cod; and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
And if you wish, then at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cod with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then incise between the stitches; and then heal by healing the other wounds until it is healthy and the abscesses are cleared.
Chapter 69.
About Castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I was led to remember it in this book; and there is no need for remembrance of it except for two reasons, one of which is that it should be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows the cure of it when it occurs; and the other reason is that we sometimes have need of castration of other beasts to improve our livestock, like mules, and oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by sectioning the seed.
Moreover in that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is that we make the beast drink hot water until its genitals are softened and loosened and hang down. And then take those with your hand into the earth until they are dissolved and do not appear to be there anymore.
Moreover in castration done by sectioning and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles to the left hand.
And then tie the suspensors, and incise above each testicle in one section until two testicles are separated.
And then incise those parts so that you can extract some excrement. And do not leave any cause on those of the scar, but rather the subtle scar which is above the veins.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves some cause on the testicles so that the beast desires to mate.
And then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Chapter 70.
About the cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which is in the space of the testicles, in which there is a figure like a female's womb in which they are felt.
And some veins come out from that cord which is in the testicles.
Moreover, in women it is a species: and it is that the womb of the woman above the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all its miniatures, with a partition before, similar to the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: two from men and one species from women. And it is necessary that you incise those adjusted flesh until it evacuates the impression of that, and then you cure those with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine comes out, which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 71.
About Abortion and Eminent Flesh caused by Women.
Abortion is strongly adjusted according to natural causes until it is detained and done with regard; and some veins are magnified in some women so much that it spreads like in men and pervades into the coitus.
Then it is necessary that you hold the excess of abortion with your hand or with a hook and incise.
And do not make an ultimate incision, rather in the region of the root, so that there is no efflux of blood.
And then heal it with the cure of wounds until it is healthy.
Moreover, born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific womb of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is similar to the partitions before according to the semblance of a snake (and for this reason some first appelants call it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we incise thus like we incise abortion, and heal it until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of gout.
Gout is when the knee of the woman is not perforated, or the small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to bad alignment which has preceded, and that is done or for flesh not well adjusted or for subtle or excessive effort.
And it is done in the belly of the mother, or in its ribs, or in the upper pulse of it, or in the lower pulse of it, and forbids from getting pregnant and from conceiving, and strongly forbids the menses.
And the recognition of that is done by observation of the uterus, if the obstruction is apparent, it is foreseen; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the fingers or with the rule.
But if the obstruction is due to subtle effort, and it is foreseen by the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that which presses on the two pubic lips, and then you pause with the fingers indicating to amend both the more inward parts.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then you extend the two lips forward so that the subtle effort is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take an ointment and anoint the place with oil and pause that on the spot, and let it stay there for a day or two so that the spot does not become inflamed.
But if the effort is great and excessive, then it is necessary that you inject that with a spatula or with a needle of myrtle.
But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then suspend that in an onion, and inject that.
And here are the medicines that stop the flow of bloody wounds, such as achaetia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted to the white album of urine.
And then administer a wide plaster of lead so that the wound does not become consolidated too quickly.
And hold that for several days and administer lukewarm water to the sick person.
And then it is cured with another treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
And some old wise men fell into the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary that you inject according to this manner. But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the belly not made contradictory with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that falls into the knee of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins into which those flow continuously with blood; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and they are made tails.
And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the belly of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
But those that are in the orifice of the mother above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail to the forks, or to the rough sheets, and inject those into the roots.
And then powder over those from which the flow of blood of one of the powders injected into the wounds stops, thus with cassia and similar to those.
And then soften the soles of the feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a mixture of sumac and scorched millet and walnuts and similar things.
And then take flour of barley and cook that with honey and wine and make an ointment on the back of it.
And if the blood is absorbed, well and good; and if not, make adhere to two ventoses, and to the nipples with scarification.
And then take an ointment and submerge it in the juice of colyander or the juice of arnaglaza or the juice of guarrievier with wine pentit, and make adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with an unguent until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the perforation of accidental hernia in the belly.
Many species of apostemes fall into the belly, such as cancer and lapident aposteme and ulcers and adherent and erpetromenes and fistulous hemorrhoids and raguaries and thyl and other apostemes. You have already spoken of these diseases and their species, and their symptoms, and the cures for them in division.
I will cover how you should operate on the abscess in this treatise, because I saw many of these abscesses that collected healthy matter, and if you want to know how the operation of the iron is done.
Then I will cover how you should consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and fluctuation and fever, and sometimes it becomes red and swollen, and then you don't touch it with perforation, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then I will cover how you should make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her feet adjusted to the partition below the belly, and her thighs spread out, and place her arms below her knees, and tie something with a ligament to what is convenient.
And then the midwife will follow on the right side and administer the instrument in which the orifice of the matrix is opened, in the form of which you will find in those cases that will be done properly.
And I will cover when you want to administer this instrument that you place in the radius of the matrix of the woman's womb, and what part of the instrument enters the matrix should not be more than the radius of the womb and leads to the disease. But if the instrument is larger than the radius of the womb, then I will cover how you should place pads on the texture of the radius of the womb so that it prohibits the entrance of the whole instrument into the womb.
And I will cover how you should place the vertex that corresponds to the instrument on the side, above, and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertex until it opens the orifice of the womb.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by hand and it is smooth and soft, then I will cover how you should succeed in removing the head of the womb with a spatula.
And when the healthy matter is evacuated, then I will cover how you should place in the wound a membrane submerged in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some stipulation; and put the plaster on the section in the radius of the womb.
And place a form before the womb and on the perineal wound a clean membrane submerged in water, in which there are swollen veins.
And then it will be cured, then two days with gentle touching that converges to what is convenient until it is healed.
And some vegetables are washed with the womb and the wound in such a way that they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in water where there is infused root of iris or long aristology, and then it returns to gentle touching.
And if the wound is deeply set in the wounded womb, then I will cover how you should be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, having care for what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to deliver babies that are badly positioned, which require medical treatment when they do not come out naturally according to figure.
It is necessary to cause the midwife to recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expressing herself with pains below and desires to smell the air, and above that which is joined to her for what is on top, and hastens the issue of the baby, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the issue of it upon the womb's head, and the second one is either suspended or pending from the navel.
Then when you see those signs, then I will cover how the belly of it should be comprehended so that the baby descends lightly, because when they are born upon the womb's head, they are given to them the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous things with good moderation.
But that which is another part is not natural and not laudable, because when the baby is born on its feet and the body of it is born in front of its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is born with its head and its hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted upon the womb's neck, and it appears like the non-laudable figures of it.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
And I have shown you the whole figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it may be signified by what and stood upon what.
When the fetus is born upon the womb's head by natural order, and it is vehement upon the woman and makes her part difficult, and sometimes its virtue is already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what women hold of it, and evaporates the conjunction of it with fenugrec powder and olive oil.
And then insert the measuring rod between the fingers of the patient's hand, to feel whether there is moisture in it, or to check if there is humidity in their fingernail. Press the woman's belly inward so that she can feel the fetus.
But if she cannot feel it, then cover the woman's body with a poultice made from the mucilage of ptilli and fenugrec in cizami.
And then command her to take a deep breath, and then exhale slowly with her mouth and nose, holding it for an hour, so that the fetus will turn and move about.
And if the two parts of the fetus are not turned from the beginning, then cover them so that you can reduce them to facilitate birth little by little. But if they do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and raise her feet above it, and then tilt the chair towards the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the concussion.
And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus is dead, then cut into them and extract the remains of the fetus or pull out the body with your hand and extract it with equality, so that it will be turned around.
When the fetus is positioned on the patient's feet, then cover them with it, and then turn the fetus little by little, and then grasp it, and then take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
But when they are positioned between the thighs, then command her to push, and make her exert herself with difficulty, so that it will turn if God wills it.
And if it is not turned in what we have recommended, then return the fetus little by little into its natural position, so that it will then be easily examined.
And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take a mucilage of alta and dissolved goma, and pound everything together in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply it to the womb of the woman, at the lower part of her belly. And then make that mixture into a syrup with warm water, until you obtain the hypochondria.
And when the parts that have been separated from it are purified, then make for it a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause it beneath it. And when you have done the sub-fumigation for an hour, then place it on a chair, and make it turn and stretch out its mouth, and raise it from that, and press the lower part of its belly with gentle compression, so that the fetus will soon be turned.
Examination of the fetus latitudinally while suspended from one of its hands. It should be engaged in reduction of its mother's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her go around.
And if she cannot walk, then place her on the bed, and shake her thighs with violent concussion, and then administer gentle treatments with the recommended mucilages.
And if the childbirth is coming, then place it on a chair, and study the reduction of the hand, and grasp the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman turn and command her to push until it is turned.
Examination of the fetus on the expanded chest with its hands and the surface of its mother's belly. That the midwife should hold the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and that it will be facilitated.
And when it is thus engaged, then place it on the womb of its mother, with what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
And then command it to move little by little, and when you have done that, then place it on a chair and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be grasped; and make it turn with difficulty. The prepared fetus lies on its side.
When the womb is horribly inflamed according to this method, consider it, and then you will insert your finger into it so that it may be evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you will insert that of the naval, so that it may not be retained and die.
And then you will push the fetus towards the partitioned parts inside so that it pauses according to what is convenient, and tell the woman to compress herself with some wrapped cloths, and the surgeon will be outside, making a gentle effort, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. You know that twins are rarely born alive, and some births are never seen three or four, but this is a strange and bitter end; but I know the natural causes, and it's not living.
And count those, it is said that they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those umbilical cords. Some births are forced-getted away like a fetus for natural birth, and some are not-born-like-this away like an unnatural birth, and so have we recommended.
And if they are difficult births of their deviated infantation and reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you will care for them like we have recommended.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it facilitated and subtlety, and I have delayed, and it is ingenious according to the entire figure according to what is prepared by the ingenious mind for health.
Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women are formed in the womb one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman aborts in the sixth, and another has totally formed ones, which causes faulty measurement of the glorious savages.
And all that is covered by the science of the midwife because it strengthens her to that small part of what, and therefore operates on what I cover.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for the dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it's not before existed, and you are forced to use operative means on me, then it is seen that you consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Then it is seen that the woman should be placed on a flat surface with her feet elevated two fingers, and her head inclined downwards and her thighs lifted.
And the minister holds that of two parts or is tied to the flat surface so that the body of hers does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you will moisten the mouth of its womb with oils and honey and mucus of fenugreek and sesame, and other things.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand into the womb, and then seeks the place where the fingers will be in the fetus.
And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be born on the flat surface of the head, and then you place your fingers in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or beneath the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or beneath the hypochondria.
More, if the birth is on its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is seen that you hold the finger on your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand facilitated and place the finger in some of those places which we have said, until you arrive at the boyish cause.
And then pause and place in the application of another finger, or the third if it is necessary, so that it may be attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude solely.
And then you will have the entire part, so that the birth of it may be alleviated thus as it is done in teeth, for the eradication of it.
And it is seen in that which is between them that the extension may be mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is seen that the midwife anoints her fingers with oil and inserts them expertly and revolves them in that which is retained.
Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers are permutated into the place where it was put outside; and do thus until the entire fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is injured from the other side, and it's not possible to reduce that due to its contraction, then it's necessary to envelop it with a bandage; and then extract it outward so that everything is forgotten, and insert it into the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
And thus it's necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the fetid humour is great, or it accumulates in the contraction, or it's in the head of the adjusted water, then it's necessary to introduce between the spinal vertebrae and separate the head and extract the water, or that which will be discovered by an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that is about to come.
And similarly, if the fetid humour has a great head by nature: then it's necessary to insert that into the algemat, or to take that with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is injured and contracted towards the scapula, then it's necessary to be opened inward so that the humidity which is in the chest is expelled.
But if it's not complicated, nor does it obey the contraction, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
And if the evacuation of the belly is apostematous or is in the hydropic condition, then it's necessary to perforate that so that you can purge the humidity that is in it.
But if the fetid humour is above the six feet, then its attraction is lighter and its direction towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
But if it's contracted towards the belly and chest, then it's necessary to extract that with a bandage which you will have enveloped over your hand, and open the belly and chest so that what is in them can flow out.
But if the other members are numb and turn to the head, then the metrona inserts into the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert the hand into the preon of the liver, and seek with that the head, and attract it towards the spinal vertebrae into the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it one or two inches, and attract it to those.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted due to apostema, because it accumulates towards the liver, then it's necessary not to trouble it; instead it's necessary to administer an effusion of humid and greasy causes. And apply emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humect.
And if the fetid humour is above the sixth rib, then if possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the fetid humour treatment.
And if that is not possible, then it should be inserted in poultices, and extracted.
And it's necessary that you don't leave any secondary cause hidden.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostemas caused by the mother.
And if it accumulates a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead fetus, and then on that focus another pregnant womb, and then a dead fetus is another fetid humour. It happens to him for a long time an apostema in the seventh womb; and it inflates until the focus becomes inflated, and begins to make a broken branch.
And I was called to his cure, and I treated him for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Then I paused over him about some hidden causes of strong attraction, and I extracted from him one bone, and then I passed some journeys, and I extracted another bone; and I was too marvelously surprised, as if there were no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existed in the seven thousand disposed milieux, and I saw her in such a manner for a long time, corrected by one small branch.
And I didn't find it strange, but rather that in this there is science and help to what the artificial hand on my hand for cure administration.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetid humour.
Form of a vertex in which the mother is opened.
This is the form of a stretcher on which the books are bound, to which binding two vertices are in two extremities of two feet. But the emperor commands that this vertex be made more subtle than the stretcher, and it be done of ebony or of boxwood.
And it is the width of each wood that two fingers and a margin of each hand are one finger, and the length of each is one palm and half; and in the middle of two woods there are two adjustments of those same woods which were fixed, from which the length is the measure of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And you should also administer two additional medications through the mouth of the mother so that it is opened when you turn to those prescribed virtuous powers.
Another form appears similar to that subtle and more transparent:
It is made of wood or boxwood, according to the similarity of strength. Moreover, in the extremity of it there are two additional thus cum times, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother, then you make the woman sit on a sheet with her feet pendant, opening what is between her thighs. And then place your hand on the instrument thus with forced fingers according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation from the mouth of the mother, until it makes a measurement so that you want.
The way to administer virtue which the ancients described:
Form of impulse in which the fetus is impelled:
Form of ami sdation in which the head is countered greatly
And it is assembled with a forceps to which the teeth are attached in the extremity, thus at times, and some veins are made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus at times, to which the teeth are attached thus as teeth of rescue in which it is incised and countered. Form of ami sedation few:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities at which the head is separated:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied the species of that and are prepared by the artisans, as it is clearer in their operation and more suited to the men for their quantity.
And you do not work with those instruments already seen as it should be, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of extraction from the secondine.
When the secondine is retained by the enfantament, then you command the patient to retain the sieve above, and then make that stornudar in condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if for thus it is deformed exit, good.
And then, you take a wand and perforate in the cover a hole and pause on that herb opening the mouth of the mother, thus as calm and rough and anet and chamomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in the wand, and pause that over the fire.
And then pause a cane tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stornudar thus as I have said, and the secondine will be forgotten with velocity.
Moreover if the treatment is not successful, then you command the matrona to submerge her left hand in oil of sizami or in mixture of altea, and then insert that into the jug and scratch it with that secondine, and when you have found the auras, then take it out and extend it little by little. If it is annexed in the womb of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not fall into vehement attraction. Beforehand, it is permitted to move the right and left ribs to facilitate.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with sturnutation and medication of the wand with herbs.
Moreover if it is not forgotten among all the causes which we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue about that in iteration of abstraction, moreover beforehand it is clear that what is ejected from it into the mouth of the mother lies in the space of the woman, and then crystallize that in enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve in some days and will be forgotten.
Moreover when they are purified, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and at the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is clear that they have been administered under-fumigations and conveniences to that.
Moreover some of the Ancients already experienced under-fumigation of nitwort and dry figs.
Form of instrument in which the woman is under-fumigated for the retention of menses and of the secondine:
It should be done by sight or by art.
And the subtle extremity should be placed in the jug and the ample extremity over the focus, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the focus.
And hold that within so that the sub-fumigation is consumed and then another is added afterwards.
Treatment of the unbroken skin of an infant's buttock.
Many infants have soft and unbroken skin on their buttocks, which has a subtle and open pores. Then advise the midwife to pierce the skin of that finger; and if not, pierce the thin spatula, and beware not to touch the tender part.
And place it on the woolen cloth infused with wine and oil; and take care that the wound is cleansed from within so that it heals.
But if you fear it will open, then place a caneula in the wound for many days, and wait until the infant is strong enough to turn.
And thus you will achieve closure of the wound by consolidation of the plague or abscess; then advise that this consolidation be incised, and take care to treat it with what we have said about treatment and poultice.
Treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur below in the lower part produce a low and thick pus, which are those that occur near the buttock or in the space of one party.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that pus is old and corrupted by the putrid white or subtle humidity, and some vegetables are drawn from these fistulas, some penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known by what is exited from them through the outlet and through flatulence; and some want to use the badness of outlet, and often it is exited from those worms.
And some of those fistulas are vegetables in the penetrating space within the bladder, and within the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
And that in which the penetrating fistula is known, entering into the buttock and not-penetrating, it is that you put your finger inside the buttock, and you will feel a subtle thread of iron or of copper in the fistula when it is not turbulent.
But if it is turbulent, then insert into that subtle thread of lead or horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progression of the wound or any cause of evacuation or worm or flatulence, thus as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the penis, then the sign of it is the excretion of urine from that and prohibition from that place where medicine should be consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread passes within here if it is not turbulent within the bone, and there is pain in the circuit of the party; and that from it comes putridity at times; and that it does not work in this medication, nor is it consolidated with pus.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment of them is troublesome and vain effort by doctors over which they are fixed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing occurs with iron spear according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been said and proposed.
And it is that the badness goes between your hands over the two fingers and lifts the legs of him upwards, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and then insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the turbulent fistula, until you know the place where the thread passes.
And if that feels the badness around the neck, then advise that you insert your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel with your finger the thread that has already been discovered to penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that sip or flesh, then you will know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not trouble yourself about it, because it is not in that healing, thus as we have said.
But perhaps some doctors say that it is healthy in some households to be bitter.
And from the medication for which you are hoping for youthfulness in him is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, thus as it has been preceded, and insert it into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then wait two or three weeks until you know that all those adjusted flesh wounds have been closed, which seem like the downy plumage of a bird.
And then take care to heal those wounds wrapped in bandages until all those adjusted flesh wounds are closed, and then take care to heal with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another treatment.
And if the tension enters, and does not penetrate into the thigh where it is in the rectum, and between that and the tension which is a vein of flesh or of cartilage, and sometimes the fistula in what is on the surface of the codena, then you dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if you can dry the tension, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where it affects the extremity of the tension, and for the tension is liberated and freed.
And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are assembled at the canal of painful urine and do not break open any of those causes.
Perhaps the flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are dissecting those wounds, then the thousand times it is of the pus, the lighter instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts well to habitual practices: so it is an adjustment of those adjusted wounds, and an abscission of the blood's excessive exudation from the humidity.
And then heal those wrapped ulcers in bandage or in causes of thrice-pressed entrails until the location gets a brace, and then heal the plague with a hardening, engendering and consolidating flesh.
And these medicines are those which are stimulating and excessive; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
Perhaps the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the rectum and is elongated from the surface of the body, then you will insert the thigh into the rectum and investigate in that.
And then if you hold the tension and between you and it is a vein of cartilage or flesh, and it is propitious for penetration, then there is no operation on it unless by way of confidence and hope.
The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize that thus as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of its cavity so that it is possible for you to enter into the veins and the propitious cure; and do not process more than the drying per so that no incision is made on the containing vessel, and that it ascends above the patient's essence with a well-willed gesture; or to elongate that vein and extract that pus which dries into the rectum, thus as we have said, or with a pointed instrument of acute extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are in the drying into one pore for encrustation; and then strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the drying, and if the atrocious pus above is not consolidated, and the herniated fistula breaks open at the part of the rectum, and it will be lighter for the patient. And the fistulas are finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tension into the fistula, and it is in the depth of the rectum around the surface of the body at the codena and at the margin of the rectum, then take the tension of perforated extremity, which is thus like a needle preparing the vessels according to this form.
and insert into that veined wrapping of five veins or around those; and then insert the tension into the vein in the fistula until you achieve the conquest of its cavity.
Perhaps it penetrates into the margin of the rectum properly dentated, then you extract the vein from that troubled place thus that you insert the thigh into the rectum; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and stretch each one, and leave it for a day or for two, and when perhaps you incise the vein in the flesh, stretch well until those flesh are incised which are between the two extremities of the vein and that fall.
And then heal the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Perhaps the atrocious fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not much in the groin, because it is not for you to do that so as not to incise the vessel; and then make it enter until it is healed.
The form of the spine-like spatulum is what has been found for the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not incise anything that is not necessary, thus sometimes.
Of stitching of hemorrhoids in which the blood flows into the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are thus according to two methods, because either they are between the rectum resembling thus that it is of carbon, or those are like a layer of rough skin. And of those are small and large, and the blood flows from those sometimes and it is one, and thus many, and thus outside the rectum, and in the extremities of it.
Perhaps those that are outside the rectum are thus according to the measures of little humidity, from which flow yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous flux, and thus according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is dentated in the rectum is that you command the patient to sit and to exert themselves until the rectum becomes dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold of them and suspend them in air with an uncle or have someone hold your finger, and then insert the veins into their roots.
Perhaps the uncles are not held by them due to the humidity and softening of them, then take them in dry, rough or woolen cloths, and extract them into the tender threads, and then insert them and powder over their hollow cavities with powders blown onto them for cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal them with another cure until they are completely healed.
And if the anus does not obey the evacuation, then insert the suppository into the anus in the place where it is most constricted, and wash it with that water which is in the vessel and which helps to evacuate more easily when the patient strains.
Perhaps the hemorrhoids are before the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your finger, or take them with an uncle, and insert them, and then heal them with water which we have said until they are completely healed.
And in the one who has an incision, you should administer sutures according to this method: take a thread enveloped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above parts, and make it penetrate through the needle into the root of the other part, and envelop the two extreme ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then cut the thread and extract the needle.
And make a totality of them, and let one of them be the one that does not hurt, so that the superfluity of the blood flow runs from it.
And then pause on the anus, wrapped in oil or cerate; and place it on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let that be until it forms a scab; and when it falls off, heal them with an unguent or another cure until they are healed.
And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, then it is necessary to remove them from the point of the spatula or with your finger until they are humid and held back by the escar, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then you remove them with a vigorous scraping because the first intention is to let the blood flow and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are completely healed.
You know that gout, that is clear, and it's not if you don't notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is made in the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends for those who have the annoyance.
And then it is necessary that it be incised where it is in the course of the vein, and held with forceps or an uncle, and eradicated from its root; and then heal it.
And if you want, cauterize the second thing that is written in the following chapter.
Perhaps a wart is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many soft words come from the mouths of children.
And the cure of it is to extend and insert it, or to strengthen it with a thread or a hair until it forms a scab. And if you want, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
Perhaps a mole is a small, rough, or fistulous growth on the surface of the body near the knee, and when it breaks out, it seems to be in the likeness of the formation of a mole, and it is made around the body.
And the cure of it is to take a needle of hawk's beak or vulture's beak, and make it strong, and place it on the mole until it contains the circle of the needle around the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the needle until you insert what is in the course of the mole, and pause it in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the mole from its root.
And if you want, make it with a needle of iron or of steel according to this form:
The part below the needle should be subtle, solid (not perforated), enveloped so that above the said part the apprehension of it is abolished and the revolution of it.
And if you want, cauterize the mole according to what is previously said in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterizing.
In the manner of instruments that are administered to give comfort.
Some comforters are made of silver or copper or tin foundry or alloyed; and some comforters are made of those small and large instruments according to what is administered, because that which is administered for the care of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are fragile or delicate, the comforters of those are small.
The form of large and few comforters:
The top of the tube that is below, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and it should be distinct at the point where the bag is tied, like many times.
And the extremity of the tube that is inserted into the anus, which is smooth (not rough) like a lion, subtly introducing; and on one side of the tube there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the size of the roots and the anus, even if it's small.
And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin are placed, and its length should be a palm.
And let it be pierced for many channels, just as it is revolving; and if the space that is between the channels is large enough for the finger.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude thread which is of ten threads, or around them; and adjust it to the bag; and when it is placed in it, let it be tightened at the top of the comforter between two distinct constrictions, and then comfortize each channel: The quality of comforting is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then let the patient be placed on their back, and elevate their legs up high and place one cord above them on which there are holes or a lancet; and apply the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the anus to facilitate, and let the minister take the bag and extract it twice or three times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine as much as is in the comforter; and then remove the comforter and the patient raises their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces out that evacuation, hold it as much as you can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, it is better to delay the treatment.
Better if you comfort them in the illnesses of solution of belly and evacuation of the intestine, then you iterate the cautery until it is healthy.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses, then let the comforter be subtle and gentle, among the comforters which children are usually comforted with.
On the treatment of wounds.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with mother and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the location on which they occur.
And the causes why many wounds are made thus are from getting hurt by a stone, or incision of space, or cutting with a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those many causes.
Better the wounds that are on the parts of the body thus are from a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of the composed chapters will come to the beginning of the third capital chapter.
Therefore, I say that when there is a simple head wound and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's from getting hurt by a stone or similar, and already has wounded the scalp so much alone and it's a great wound and fears about that patient having an abscessed apostema, then you should quickly treat the cephalic wound, and don't delay; and extract from the blood according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is extracted from the wound is little.
And let there be phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and gross vices.
Better if from the minute you prohibit some cause, then let it be diminished of the vice and not approach to flesh nor to vice.
And pause on the wound, if it has abscessed apostema, cut into oil rose solutives or in wine in which it is stipulated.
More often it is certain to make an incision on the affected area, then pause over the wound, if it has recently bled and the air has not yet changed the powder that you will recommend applying little by little.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause on the healing wounds until they are healthy.
More often if the wound is large or is due to a spacious and similar incision, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with a suture according to what you recommend for their suture.
More often if the wound has exposed bone and flesh, and it is not retained by them except for a small suspensor, then incise there and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of cartilage, and command the patient to abstain from nourishment in which there is grossness: cabbage and fermented foods are similar to their composition, until they are well-compounded.
And if you find decay and rot in the cartilage and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and treat it properly.
More often if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows a lot of blood that can be harmful, and it is not absolved by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it unincised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, you provoke what we have said does not concur, then you cauterize until the blood is absolved.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; indeed you dust over those wounds with that powder, because consolidated, so that the air does not change them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and extinct earth three parts; let it all be well-triturated and crumbled, and fill the wound with it, and let it be constricted by a good bandage until it stays on that affected area, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And you strengthen it from beneath with pillows and lift it up, and do not disturb it while it is like that, because it is not incised, for it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healthy.
And sometimes it happens that this alone is sufficient, when you do not have iris and dragon's blood present.
And now this medical operation is suitable for large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are stretched, and the recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then you do not attend to the position of this powder, but rather take care of those wounds with what we have said, indeed you pause over those healing wounds with digestive powders, or you pause over those poultices made from flour of ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purulent; and you treat them with another cure until they are healthy.
More often if it happens to the wound fractured in bone, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
And you will direct the cure of fractures of the head in what is coming next.
Of the wounds of the neck.
More often if the wound happens on the neck, then it is not in difference in medication, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
More often if the nerves of the neck are incised or arteries, then if they are nerves, it is not in their origin but rather evaded cure with what makes vehement stipulation, indeed as we have said and written that it is veterinary and similar to their composition, because it does not harm the nerves and contradicts that. And you do not pause over the wound for any total cause of complete numbness, because the substance of the nerves is numb and their continuity with it is in the brain, which is the pus that is above all the members.
And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, indeed as it is caused by washing with double water, some veiled infusion in rose oil or non-rose oil, and thyme when it is washed with double water and the other minor pains are diminished according to this manner, and healing humors.
More often if the wound is large, then administer suture, or bind the lips of it, and treat it with pillows until it is healthy.
More often if the wound is deep or happens to it at the lowest part of the pus, then you pierce that in the place most pressed upon.
More often if in the wound an artery is incised and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke what we have said.
More often if you have incised the vertebrae of the throat or all, and thus saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the cartilage with a suture on the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize it and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with decent structure, and lift it up for some days; and treat it with healing humors in which there is stipulation and excitement until it is healthy.
When the plague is in the bone and makes an impression, then perceive it thus, and if there are fragments of it in him, extract all that you can from there; and what you have not perceived, let it enter into the part where the plague will be relieved, and separate it from the severity of his pain.
And if the plague is recent, then dust over that area with the powder which you have recommended. If the plague is a festering wound, then cure it with that water of which the remedy will come to you in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of the lance or of the cotyle, and you measure its depth, then consider that if the plague has reached the vitals when the patient's condition worsens; then know that the plague is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the seventh vein, then you pause at the first hour's powder, and do not strenuous that which is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and alleviates the patient, rather pause on the attractive retention, and remove those two veins a day.
And if the retention is not present to you, then pause at the orifice of the plague, which is very close so that it sucks out what is of the humors; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it flows out what is in him, adjusted.
If the plague has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and he has good other dispositions, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with warm baths and another entire cure until it is healed.
If the healing of it is excessive, and already all time is opened, then know that already a festering wound has been made; therefore cure it according to the seventh chapter.
And if the plague is from incision of the scapula or of the cotyle, and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with water that is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has made an impression in the bone, and its roots are fixed, then twist the plague and gather to extract those roots, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then let them enter so that the plague will be relieved, for their extraction from there is alleviated.
And of the other plagues that occur in the other limbs, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The indisposition that affects the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of their introjection at the seventh place, because it will be opened and becomes gross due to the instrument of it being made difficult.
And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that convene in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other plagues, but above all there are own proper ones in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Then I say that when the plague is small and there is some cause of the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has received inflammation from the frigidity of the air.
And therefore when it is so, then it is necessary that you scale it thus, that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cypress, and spice, and embrocations with that in the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And some evacuations make it go in which has been stipulated, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is taken altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of it is alleviated with few causes.
If the instrument of it is excused near this cure, then you separate the disruption a little with an instrument in which they are inserted to make morrhoids.
And the primary cure is better, when it is properly administered so that it does not become tedious, and there is no occupation to hinder its necessity and failure.
Of the instrument, thus you will see the shape of it:
One part of the sharp-edged knife, and the other not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of the spatula, unless it is obtained with a few.
And then when the plague is amplified and goes outside the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction follows the form of its natural location, in its own proper place, if possible, because better is.
However when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head thus higher than their chest, and the parts below.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and consideration always on this, so that the part where the plague is may be higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in severe plagues and in mild plagues.
And in small plagues, place this that is prepared for you, and make it so that the minister is among your most skilled hands, which holds the disruption whole in its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and uncover from that to him who knows the suture of some other cause.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then you release the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle once, without putting faith in the two extremities of the cord, as two extremities of the ciphac which is below the cord of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the cord and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so you form four orders.
And then you stretch with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some divisions of two parts together, and then add the two lips to the plague for decent addition; and then you release the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then you tie it with double faith as if it were the primary needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you complete the entire contraction of the plague.
And thus the mild needles are between roughness and subtlety, because the subtle needles more lightly pierce the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert into the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be mild in subtlety and roughness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not lightly pierced and the plague is healed before its consolidation.
And there should not be prolonged sutures because the plague should not be prohibited from consolidation.
And then you insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not let the patient turn over to their own dormier; and you place above the suture puffs expanded from the entire part, which hold the extremities of the needles; and then you release them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles are in this manner more convenient in small plagues, because they have need of a suture with one needle or two or around those.
However the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer a suture with four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one way, with a needle in which faith is enveloped in subtlety and roughness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, you return the needle to that same part of the cord from which it began, so that the faith retracts from the most sublime part to the plague, so that the suture is according to the suture of a drawstring in which the strings are strengthened.
And place between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And in such a suture I have seen the plague that was affecting a man in his belly which had been plagued by a contusion, and it was the disruption of the largest plague of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine of my middle place and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have reduced that deposit which the intestine had been without the plague for 23 hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured it and it is healthy; and then I visited him for many years, and it is converted into its dispositions.
And the other doctors have judged that it was not a curable illness; and by miraculous chance, because you did not cure that patient, because it was in a place where the patient was not touched by any medicine, but instead I put many doses of warm water on the affected area every day and diligently gave him honey mixed with melon water until he was cured.
Perhaps you did not direct two special types of sutures properly, according to the narrative of Pareula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the groin, and you insert a needle from the front part to the back part.
And then as the needle penetrates into the groin and in that same moment it goes straight according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and there is the extremity of the sciatic nerve where you inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part, in the other extremity of the thigh.
And then as you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extremity of the thigh from the back part to the front part; and there is the extremity of the sciatic nerve which is in this region, and make the needle penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate also your penetration, which you make penetrate into the sciatic nerve in the extremity of the thigh, which is inside the patient's body until all that penetrates.
And then begin from this same moment to extract that which is in the extremity of the sciatic nerve on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the groin which penetrated, and then return it to its place in the groin and body of the sciatic nerve which is on the other side of this extremity of the thigh; and withdraw that from the groin which belongs to the patient.
And make it one way and another, and make it one way and then another way until you collect all that which is beforehand according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you collect a suture of pellicles in which you gather the skin, so that you collect the sciatic nerve one way from the part of the extremity of the groin, and then leave another way until it is completed.
Perhaps the second special type of suture proper, which is said by Gualia, and this is from the serum of the patient and recommended for him, it is that you collect according to similarity in which you gather medicinal alchemy, so that they add all the part to its comparable part in the convenient nature; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the thigh and the other extremity, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
That you fix the needle in the extremity of the thigh at your proper distance from the back part, and make it penetrate to the front part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the sciatic nerve; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the back to the front in two extremities of the sciatic nerve.
And then revolve those circles, and make them penetrate certain parts from the front to the back in two extremities of the thigh other than those which are on the contrary side.
And this manner of suturing is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned in remembrance.
This is the serum of Gualia.
And perhaps the dissector says that a suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these a few threads, and begin with an introduction of the needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who gather the hollowed-out bodies.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other locations of the belly.
Perhaps the judgment of medicinal treatment of plague is a judgment of other plagues.
Which cause is because when you consider the recent plague with the holy saint beforehand, that the air alters it, and reduces the intestine and gathers it and adapts it decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those gathered threads which are present in you, until they make hard skin and cut the fibers, and consolidate sciatic nerve and thigh; and then cure it thus as is the cure of other plagues, until it is healthy.
Perhaps if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that much, because it begins to gather arm, warm water, and exchange those two doses a day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositional cases when the plagues are simple.
Perhaps if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then it is good that you submerge the woolen thread in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and joints.
If there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, because many veins are obstructed, then one should create a crucible with a black stipple application, and mostly if the purging is performed in the intestine and it is a penetrating external exit into its cavity.
You know that the one from the large intestine is of a more languid sanity than the one in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine, which is called "gégénou" does not receive sanity from the plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and to its magnitude, and to the subtlety of its body, and to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Perhaps what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and consequently that recent thing reduces it according to your direct nature in which you reduce the intestines in a gathered way.
Perhaps it has passed into the space and already made a green or black vein, then you stretch that faithful hand over the area that is denied of it, so that blood flows from the fabric, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then you insert that which is another ligament, and pause the two extremities of the faithful hand pending the departure from the plague below it, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the fabric's emission and release of the arm from the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they accumulate in the intestine.
When disruption accumulates in the intestine and is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some homes, because thus you see that which was plagued in the seven winds of the belly with percussion of the lancet and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gestation and ventosity.
Therefore you will pursue the cure of it already, because it was not confused in its sanity, maybe you will continue to subtle it from within, so that it may be sanctified and the place is consolidated.
And you will see that the place is already consolidated, then you should think about the patient who suffers from the bad accident in the seven winds of the belly; and do not suffer for that bad accident and roam in their thousand disposed and mangling ways, and then enter in a bath and it is exercised in its digits.
And you will discover some experienced experiments that when an intestine suffers from plague, and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take firm grasps of large heads; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a grasp of those that have the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of them and stretch your mouth, it detaches the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another grasp for the first time, and do not cease from doing so until you make grasps one by one according to the quantity of all the plague.
And then return it and thus the plague; and reunite those attached heads in the intestine until the intestine is sanctified; and do not accumulate bad nonuments to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with faithful subtlety which is made from the intestine of annexed beast, because it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these intestines, and it is not descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the faithful one, enveloped, and then enter that faithful one into needles and thus into that intestine, and return it to the disruption.
And this manner of suture with grasps is not but according to the way of trust and hope.
Perhaps the plague is great and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not but subtlety, and there is no sanity of it at all.
Of the cure of ulceration and fistula.
You know that all plague and aposteme when they become inflamed and ancient, it is made ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets worse over time and does not detach, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it that azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a painful, hard, white node in which there is no pain and it is conquered thus as it is conquered by the penalty of anguish; and therefore it is named that calculus, that is, penalty.
And it is in some humid homes, which gets worse; and strongly the humidity is detached at some hours. And some veins affected by this humidity are moved, and it is few, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of their loves with medicines in the division.
And thus you will know how to cure a fistula, which is made by way of operation with hand.
And you will know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for some of them are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the diaphragm, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the spinal vertebrae, or to any of the composite joints made up of the hand and foot; and from those that give proximity to the principal member and its semblance.
And therefore those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are among the difficult-to-cure diseases, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is one of the deep-seated fistulas that does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you will acquire that in him.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a subtle point of lead, because lead in the levity of the sick body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify upon him with a point.
Then crystallize the horrific orifice for its own horrific orifices, because the humidity through which you crystallize that goes away from the other horrific orifices and corrects their course.
And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula that has very horrific orifices and this is all about your total strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the patient, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the area, and semblance of the significations and accidental causes next to the aposteme.
And since you have stated all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have said.
Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the vein and of semblance, and cure it until it be healed.
But if the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then you will know that you have inserted it into the preon as much as possible, and you will manifestly cleanse that of all its corrupt flesh; and you will administer certain enveloped medicines acutely, and introduce them into the conquest of the fistula, which has been comprehended in iron.
And do that which is some of the vigorous things introduced until the acute medicine corrodes all that which remains in the conquest of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with the juices that engender healthy flesh until it be healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is away from you certified that, then you should inquire into it and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that until the corruption be totally removed; and then cure that which the flesh will take in to be healed.
And if it is not healed and throws out its arm as it used to do, then you will know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you will discover again with second thoughts and exquisitely make the reason of it and the mundification of it in the last fortified stronghold, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep-seated profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you are not born to leave that alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract that, then you will attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and from those do not leave any cause in your strength.
But if you have found a contrary cause of the humidities, and in their inception there is no fear nor error, then you will dissect those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and remove the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause on the plague that you may worsen the plague, and let it enter where it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and constrict the section which you have inserted in your operation.
Be careful, lest you fear, pause on the submerged bone above the triple olive oil, or the submerged bone in Egyptian angular vertebrae, or in the alcove of green angular vertebrae, because when you touch those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and those attractions are alleviated.
If it is a large bone similar to the bone of the chamber or thigh or resembling those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so solitary, then remove that in resolution so solitary backward until the blackness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the plague.
If that which of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and all that which has penetrated into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you attend to someone who has experienced it in their thigh, so that they may pause on that and assist you with your operation.
A young man of around thirty years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the wounded parts, the matter spread through the body until it reached the thigh, and it is a matter of apostema, a great apostema, and I do not think that there is an external cause.
And then I think that time is extended for the error of the doctors until the apostema is removed, and I correct the matter of the putrid materials, and its cure is then paused until the thigh is fistulated, and they are in the rotten words which all get purulent and humid matters of the body.
And then many doctors gathered around for two years, and I did not find any wisdom in them except in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of it and the matters that were corroding from it, those rotten words for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
And then I introduced a probe into one of those rotten words and penetrated the probe to the bone.
And then I probed and scrutinized all the rotten words and tried to bring them to light from all parts of the thigh.
And then I cut and dissected around one of those rotten words until I discovered a part of the bone, and I extracted that corrupted thing, and it was already decayed and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the thigh until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I cleared away that which was discovered and prepared from the bone discovered.
And I judged that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had extracted and cleared away, and I had already demolished.
And then I paused the restoration of the plague with consolidated medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily upon the primary discovery, and I continued to find corruption in the bone.
And I cleared away that which appeared to me from that corruption, and then I did perforate to make the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered about the other side and did not cease to penetrate the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I penetrated around a palm of it, and that extract was from its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated and healthy.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and its section unless for the disposal of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it happens in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncopy malady.
And so it is healthy through entire sanitation, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it is well done the disposal of it in its own body and returned its virtue to it; and it is converted into its own dispositions and did not do anything contrary to it in ambulation nor nuance in any cause.
If it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already traumatized, then it is necessary that you dissect according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend to its own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh above the place where you want to saw for fear of not sawing the flesh.
And stop putting a table under them decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to prevent the corrupted flesh from rotting.
And cover the small corrupted area little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and force the closure of the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not emerge, although it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the entire flesh of all parts; and stop putting a table underneath, and stop covering that of the first part where the corruption enters until the closure of the other part is continued.
And make the closure according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then dissect that corrupted joint, and stop the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in the ingenium (or perhaps "in the engine" or "in the mechanism", but it's likely that "ingen" is an old word for a body part or a system).
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is very difficult; however, cover so that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you grasp it, and remove it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and also in case your ingenium (or engine/system) can be rectified by you, when it does not cause you contrariety or nervousness.
And you know what instruments are suitable and the closures to cut these bones are very subtle according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare all species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
And you know that this operation depends on the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, because then you have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for the instruments in all illnesses.
And you will find in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will need, as I will simplify them as those that proceed to your prohibition which you will experience about the others. Form of closure:
Form of another closure:
Form of a large other closure:
Form of a groove: The head of this groove is according to the form of a star-shaped claw head, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of an awl.
And it is not convenient unless you have that awl confricated with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a wide razor:
Form of another decently made closure: it is made with an arched curve of the iron below and the sharpness of the iron above, and the member of the iron of boys is decently made to puncture. Form of it:
Form of a razor in which there is a cavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor similar to a lancet:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one is similar to a groove, and the extremity of it is like a closure, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a groove that is convenient for a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly you know that all the causes that we have said about razors and incisors and closures.
About the extremities of incision and the closure of the bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or because you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption worsens and goes to the member which is not perceived by any cause, then you know that you should incise that member until it reaches the place where the corruption is, so that the evil may evacuate through it, either by death or by major defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member becomes black until it is understood that fire has already consumed it, or it becomes blacker until the blackness reaches that member which is dead and takes all the body; and thus you know about the incision of that one.
It seems that the cause of the corruption is a percussion of certain venomous causes, such as the sting of a scorpion or of a viper, or of rue.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you inject the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you inject at the root of the little finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the little finger of the arm.
And if you want to affect that, then inject into the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for the cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly if corruption affects the foot when it reaches the toe of the foot, then you inject into that up to one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you inject into the entire foot. Maybe if it spreads to the knee, then you inject into the leg up to the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then it is not possible to cure it except by dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
And the way to inject into the limb or to sew it up is that you stretch the ligament in the part below where you want to inject, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament upwards; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is totally discovered; and then it is injected or sewn up.
And take care that it is placed far from the ligaments of all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and an abscess is cautiously avoided.
Maybe if there is a flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the area carefully, or stop it with some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a ligament at a convenient place, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sick foot, this same accident which you and I have recommended, which is to burn the blackness in the sick foot with adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
And that corruption happens primarily in the sick toe until it reaches the entire foot.
And then that man prepares himself for the cure, since he wants to remove the annoyance from the limb with the vehemence of that which takes away pain and distress, and injects into that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
A long time ago, it happened to him that same corruption in the finger of the hand indicated.
And then it came to me, and I have perfectly performed the percussion of that superfluity on the hand of the medicines, according to the mundification of the body; and it is not rebounded, the superfluity, until it begins to move into the other finger up to where it begins in the hand.
And they asked me to inject the hand of his, and I did not want to do anything that would rebound on the percussion of that superfluity, and maybe I was afraid of the injection of the hand of his death, because the virtue of the patient was in danger.
And since he separated from me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and injected his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be a helper regarding what is said about this illness, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it bursts and perforates, and the blood is drained from it, and remains in the place where it was as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above it thus subsides, and it does not reach the last corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Maybe if the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into a member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
And the cure of it is that you inject the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and mainly when it is subsided and made thin like a thread, and you ensure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Maybe if you think that the cord adheres and that corruption has not achieved its last consequence, and in the cord it has passed from one side to the other, then you cure that man by cleansing.
It is necessary to consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you hold is of fetid odor, then cleanse with Egyptian medicine, which is made from oil and vinegar and zinc oxide, receiving divided parts equally, and adjust them in a small vessel, and apply them over the focus until the medicine is fully absorbed and pervades to a specific melancholy.
And then you take of the water that is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; and cleanse with that in the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that precious medicine; and do it for so many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
Some burned ashes are cleansed with water of cinnamon, when it is not present to you at this medicine; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse with it until you confirm that the sinus is fully opened.
And if the patient does not have tolerance to the Egyptian medicine or the water of cinnamon, then cleanse with the medicine in water and honey, which is mixed with zinc oxide, and cleanse with it in wine and honey, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and it makes the sinus adhere, and it increases when there is an excess of moisture and dryness.
And when you do some burned ashes and confirm that the sinus is already cleaned, then cleanse with the medicine in water that makes the flesh of the leg tender.
And it is that you take of the oily dyaphinicon and dissolve it in oil of rose and vinegar; or that you cleanse with those medicines and other oils that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on oils.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow where the cannula of the syringe is not received, then you amplify it by adding a little iron little by little, and pause in the warm water wrapped in Egyptian oil or in basilicon oil until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you join the lips of the medicine with a suture and leave it for a quantity in which the syringe is introduced.
And if the orifice of it from which the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus below the place where it is in the body so that the arm may flow until below, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus until the environment of the pus below according to your will, then you should prepare the member with preparation for which the arm flows lightly according to what is apparent to you and that no cause of the arm is retained.
That which is over the orifice of the sinus, which you clean in an entire hour so that you extract what is adjusted in the body of the arm. And to know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested.
And also you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is placed over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or it takes proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third or tenth day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the oil.
But if the sinus is properly spaced, then no virus can subtly enter, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, because the healing of it is proper, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues, and of those which make the contrary of it.
And if the sinus for many days is an undigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like Egyptian oil, when there is an adjusted excess of addition of zeigy.
And the last medicine which is curative, it is that you take of Egyptian oil and dissolve it in rose oil, and it is over the vial into which the anticyptic substance is added, and then confirm that with the body, and use that.
And it seems to be doing an action, when there is no arm, in a confined space, as much as it is possible to be gross, and use of it; or that you take mirra and aloen and enses, and trissa all and pulverize over the honey that is on the focus, and then draw lines over the drap and strengthen it over the sinus; and draw lines over the honey which has been confined so that it is gross, and pulverize over the drap and strengthen it over the sinus.
And some vegetables should be administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and flour of errors and centauria, and use of those simples or adjust them, trissa those and crumble and pulverize over the honey that has been recommended; and remove from it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the pruning of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you heal with a fistular cure, thus as it is said below.
Of the cure of painful and worn-out nails and toenail incisions added to the division.
Painful nails are an abscess which grows beneath the nail of the finger or toe, and they grow in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less expected, or it is abscessed by a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and you should cut into it so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all, and it perverts its corruption to the bone within, so that it becomes fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes darkish.
And then when you have that which we have said in the division and it does not conform to your cure, then you should burn all the superfluous flesh that has grown from the nail and then cauterize the wound with fire, because cauterizing is not helpful in this way.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already comprehended the flesh at the divided parts, and they begin to putrefy and rot, then you should pause with subtle rays beneath the angle of the nail that touches the flesh, and impel it under and incise that flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn within so that it is totally removed; and then cure that which has been grossly affected until it is healthy.
But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you should incise the bone itself and extract it, because no time is lost when the corrupted bone is in the body.
And if the corrosion and corruption go into the finger, then you should incise it in one of the nodes according to its remembrance, and then cure it until it is healthy.
But if the nail receives percussion or attrition, and receives in that violent pain, then you should begin to fleubotomize the patient, and then cut off the nail with a spatula-like instrument transversely from below upwards, and be careful that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you cause more violent pain, and it will be the cause of the superfluous growth of the flesh in that place; and then cure that place where it ceases to hurt.
But this is adjusted, which is born in the hands of some men, because it is entirely flesh, and it is entirely in the bones, or it is entirely in the nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in some nodes of the finger does not get worse, and that which is born in the joints is entirely bad.
And of those that are fleshy growths, the cutting is easier, and it is that you should incise them from their root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscess.
But in that which is born on the fingers from the nodes, you should incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws according to what, and then cure it until it is healthy.
But consolidation which accelerates the fingers among the worn-out joints or by birth of the man who is thus, or for consolidation of the wound or for combustion of fire, or for similarity, therefore you should cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between the drapings of the swollen fingers with rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated according to what is desired.
And similarly if consolidation accelerates in some fingers on the palm, then you should cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
From the examination of ulcers, they are various.
Ulcers are various, and they are enveloped by thick, full superfluous melancholic humors which come from the members of the body, and their greatest influence is in the legs, and they are greatly influenced in the legs of travelers and workers and carriers.
Then you should administer purification of the body from black bile by evacuating strongly, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
There are two ways to cure them of iron ferrous: one is that the black blood is evacuated and its bad properties are removed, and the other way is that the vein is elevated and all the blood is extracted.
The sectioning of it is done in this way: at the beginning, apply a warm compress to the leg until the thick blood is resolved, which is purulent in the leg, and then stretch the patient's leg to the partition above the thigh, into the hollow of the knee, with one bandage, and then section the vein in one place, or two, or three, with ample sectioning, and then elevate the black blood from the bottom of the partition below the leg, upwards, until the quantity that you want is eliminated and which time you will have mastered, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
And then leave it, and command him to abstain from black bile-inducing foods.
And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not harm the patient.
The elevation of them is done in this way: you who raise the patient's leg, if there are many pelles, and then place it on a bench and apply a warm compress to the leg until it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if the bench is not at your present, until the member is scalified.
And then section the codeina at the right of the vein for sectioning in the loin or in the back of the patient's knee, or in the lowest part of the patient's foot near the ankle.
And then uncover the codeina with an unguent and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is of the patient's appearance which sometimes declines into blackness.
And then as you evacuate and remove the codeina, you see that white humour which was formerly cordial.
And then place it below the radius until it is elevated and freed from the codeina, and suspend it with an unguent or ointment of lion's blood.
And then section another section, and section that section for three days, and then excoriate the codeina from the partition below the vein until it appears.
And then elevate it and insert it into the back section of the ankle, and then extract it and elevate it until it is eliminated through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And do it until you extract it from the section that is above or outside of all the sections, until everything is eliminated; and then insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-edged needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce below the radius and revolve your hand on all parts until it is gathered. And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it much and it will come over the patient through that injury.
And when all the humors are evacuated, then pause over the place of the plague and anoint it with violet oil and unguent, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if life is constricted having twisted to the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then you should confine yourself above all the twisting of it and the places of its enveloping, and then suspend it with an unguent until it elevates all.
And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that you do not plague it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
Method of inserting into the one whose life is sectioned:
It is not to be applied excessively, thus with the ointments neither of acute extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of great flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; having been in excessive grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on cold and dry lands, thus like the Athenians in Arabic lands and in Indian lands, which are dry and arid with little tenderness, and in which there are no herbs or breezes.
And strongly rooted in other places of the body are the legs.
And the gestation of it is by putrefaction that you see in the channel, thus venomous darts pierce the body, and generate serpents and worms and snakes born between the intestine and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of its advent is from this vein that causes inflammation in the leg with vehement swelling; and then the place is evacuated; and then the vein is cleared of the humor from the place of that evacuation, which seems to reject a plant-like residue.
And then it appears from there the extremity, then you will find that you are wrapped around a piece of lead weighing one drachm, up to two drachms, and not exceeding that, and let the lead be suspended from the leg.
And as many times as the eyes of the afflicted area are affected by some cause beforehand, wrap it in lead and apply that. And if the motion is prolonged, then you inject a portion of it and wrap the remainder; and do not inject that which seems to be contrary until it is fully evacuated, because if you inject that, it contradicts and enters into the flesh, causing aposteme and putridity in the place and bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is fully expelled from the back of it and nothing remains of it in the body.
And from this vein it is extracted in some men who are in their longevity of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have arrived at a point where I extract one of 20 palms.
And if it is injected at the time of its medication, then introduce the radium into the tract of it and perforate that long tract in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it by curing apostemes.
And in this vein some times it has many roots, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific roots, and is extracted from each horrific root.
And thus cure it as we have said in the division and with that which has been said above.
About the generation of worms under the skin, and it is called cattle disease.
This disease is named in some land as our cattle disease because it often occurs in the thighs and is a worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, and goes throughout the entire body, weakening and debilitating, and shows itself by the sentiment of each member, from member to member, until it disrupts the intestine and exits.
And its generation is by putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing worms and serpents and roundworms and ascarids to grow in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the whiteness, then strongly roots are born in it and enter and destroy the whiteness, and often occur many times.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not fail to use the ambulation and apparition of it according to the sentiment, and consequently it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and constriction, and then dry above it and extract it.
And if it is imbedded in the flesh and does not come out, then you pause with a cautery iron over the place until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it in the place, which corrupts the place as we have said.
Maybe you have seen that essence arrive at the whiteness of the head, then strengthen over the eyebrow with a strong structure, and dry above it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use purifying medication to evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against windy generations that generate putrefaction.
About the section on nafer's disease.
This disease is named in our land nafer, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and then it is spread from member to member.
And already I have seen that according to what I recommend to you. You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since you stayed for an hour, you saw that inflammation go away thus as it was going down from there, but more lightly than it should be, thus if it were silver you would see it corroding from place to place.
And then I put myself in the pain of that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
And then I ran to the other body until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the entire body according to what you saw; and I was too marvelously surprised by the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And you have already seen that in the mirrors of your eyes, according to that manner, although you have seen many things that are changed from one member to another. Perhaps it is not visible in the eyes, just as it is in women.
And you do not think it is there unless it is for the reason that the woman was of vile blood and uncovered veins, and in this way the sentiment of changed temperament appears.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have a humid body with weakened veins.
And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, then you should stretch over that and leave it lightly and slowly enter so that the constricted temperament is released, and cauterize the area.
Perhaps you have not seen those evil eyes, then you cure him by exciting the body and that which expels bad temperaments, and cleanse those foul pills of serpent-like and similar things.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to species, and according to the places of the body in which they fall, because their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have astellas (possibly "wings" or "tips").
And of the symptoms of the wound is when you cut into the arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it sits on the siphac which is above the brain, because it causes vehement pain, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the eyes, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the strength is absent and the voice is destroyed, and it sits on the place of the wound with humid white pus-like matter, and you see something similar to abscesses of the flesh.
And therefore if you appear to have these symptoms, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Perhaps the symptoms of the arrow when it pierces the heart are so near to the left breast, and you feel as if something is fixed in a hard cause, and not a fleeting cause; and therefore the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the color of the wound is black, and there is a coldness of the extremities, and numbness, and syncopes; and therefore you know that death descends from all sides.
And the symptoms when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectation of bloody spittle from the wound, and the veins that are near the neck are apostematized, and the color of the patient's complexion is changed, and he exhales a great deal of spirit, and demands attraction of fresh air.
And if the arrow is stuck in the peritoneum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes a great cry with vehement pain and suspense, and does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if the arrow is stuck in the stomach, then therefore you see signs of the wound being accompanied by some indigestion.
And if the arrow is stuck in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, you see some fissure of the wound, or the web, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure by extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow is stuck in the bladder, and it is obstructing the urine, and it causes some cause to the partitions beforehand, and therefore there is pain over the patient's body, then you know that it is mortal.
Perhaps the other members are like the face, neck, and gullet, and the shoulders and the adjacent ones, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similars among the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And you recommend that to you who have seen the essence of these arrows, because they signify for that above the true cure.
Which cause is, because in one house an arrow falls into the lacrimal duct of his eye in the radix of the nose, and you extract it from him to another part, leaving the gray humor of his eye, and he is healed, and does not affect the eye of the document.
And if you extract another arrow from a Jew's quiver, which was hidden in the gray area of the shoulder, then the eyelid would be swollen and then the arrow would have been completely concealed and not found until a small extremity stuck to the shoulder flesh, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, at Ferrileon where there were no golden ornaments.
It is the fault of the Jew, and he did not have a bad accident on his shoulder.
And you extracted another arrow from a Christian man whose arm was pierced by an Arabic arrow, and it was the one with golden ornaments; and then you had inserted something between two guides over that, and it was submerged in his arm; and then you were subtle about that, and you carefully extracted it, and it healed the Christian.
And you extracted another arrow from a man whose stomach was pierced by it, and you thought he would die from that; and then, since he passed thirty days without any change in his condition, you inserted something over the arrow and engaged with it, and it healed, and it was not a bad accident for him.
I saw a man in whom an arrow was stuck in his back, and the wound had consolidated over him, and since he received proper care for seven years, you removed the arrow from the root of the thigh.
I saw a woman in whom an arrow was stuck in her stomach, and the wound had consolidated inside her, and it did not change in her condition in reality, and the woman did not have any harm in some of her natural functions.
I saw another man in whom an arrow was stuck in his face and the wound had consolidated, and you removed the arrow, not causing much pain, and many signs seemed to indicate that.
And you extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was stuck in a hidden place near his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was completely concealed.
And you were called for the cure of him due to the removal of the arrow within three days.
And then you touched the wound of the arrow very gently; and then you inquired about that with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little below the right aurelia, and then I suspected that this puncture was due to the extremity of the arrow.
And I plastered the place where I had applied attractive and digestive remedies, convincing myself that the place would be purified for it to appear to me as the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed over that.
And it did not happen at the significant accident place that the arrow had reached that place; and you continued with the plaster over it for many days and no accident happened; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and the badness of the excess of it was removed in many days until one day I felt the arrow inside my nose and recognized it to myself.
And then you applied acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it was opened, and with a tender touch I felt that, and touched the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the flesh.
And then you adjusted in the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until it appeared visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I spent my time on that for a period of four months.
And then because the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I remained there, and did not obey the judgment, then you did not cease to subtly engineer and contrive about that in many ways of ingenuity, until one day you began to descend with forceps fashioned like teeth, according to what will be seen at the end of the chapter, until you extracted it; and then you restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the wound consolidated, and it healed entirely, and it did not remain in any condition.
And you recommended to yourself the quality of extracting certain arrows because it pauses the rule and significance over that which I have not said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend it freely.
And the craftsmen know how to compare little about much; and it is present about what is absent; and they introduce a new operation and novel instrument, which descends from the external causes of the art when they are accidental.
And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they entered; or by contrast with the other part.
And that which is gone through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the judgment of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
It seems that the patient is stuck in you and does not obey your will, then leave that for some days and afterwards take it to a doctor's attention and move it on any day, and already it has been forgotten.
And if it does not obey your will, then wait for some days, afterwards you should perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that entire affected part with subtle travel within so that the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract that.
Perhaps if the arrow is already embedded in the body's location, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you inquire about that in tenta, and if you feel that, then aim at that with some instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you feel upon the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have the aurelhas which are held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is stuck from entire affected part to the very end that you may do; and ingeniate upon that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all affected parts until it makes that obey; and subtly use a subtle delicacy so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
And if you cannot operate on that at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts that are in its circuit can be restored, and afterwards take it out because then it is alleviated. Perhaps if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer that which we have said about the cure in the sick head chapter.
And beware of your vertebrae of inscizio of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingeniously in all manner possible for the evasion of the arrow; and make that facilitated and tranquil and tardy and firm thus as you have and I recommend.
And thus you make counter-pressure on the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you find the case of the arrow in him, because it may be more juvenile. Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten by the counter of the other part, or that already proceed to some part from outside, or have made the extrication of the arrow by sentiment of the part above the codena propdana and times that eminent; then you see about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then aim at that, because it is made lighter for the will.
Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to counter-pressure until the arrow emerges from the bone, and amplify so that it meets, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for some days, and then try again until you succeed.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then you impel it with him.
Perhaps if the shaft is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, instrument concavely so that it enters the concavity of him in the hollow of the arrow and then impel it with him.
Perhaps if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then wait for you to concave all the flesh in which it is, if that is possible for you, and then take care of that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow is caught in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is close to you touching that with the tent, and it is possible for you to see about that, then see about that and beware of inscizio of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and afterwards close the wound if it indiges, and take care of that until it is healed.
The form of forceps that are customarily used to remove arrows:
They are like the extremities of birds with a beak-like shape that are made sharp when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.
And of those are made special motifs, large, few and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of its constriction.
thus with a radius in order to alleviate the instrument from it into the concave arrow and it is propelled with that.
Of the bloodletting of the veins.
The veins for bloodletting of which it is customary to bleed thus... of which they are in the head, 16. there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they are called "alhasisain"; two herbs that appear in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes that are called "aspicientz"; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the upper lip; and two veins that are below the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called "algenic" — ; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue. More, the veins that are bloodletted in the arms are thus:. because of those, one is a cephalic vein, and it is from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a moderate vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people name it "vein of the whole body", and the basilica is a vein that is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow, and it is that which appears above the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the auricular finger and the little finger, and there are two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is beneath the curvature of the inner side of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is beneath the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is beneath the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for chronic and migrating and sahafti and ulcerous headaches of the bad old head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you recommend to yourself: it is that you should shave the head of the patient, and should be rubbed on the occiput in the place of both veins with a dry and good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a bandage that appears to have two places of premegutz of the head; and seek there with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here it is.
Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert it beneath the vein in the codeina until the bloodletting comes out to the bone. And then you raise your hand on the vein and codeina above the parts and insert the vein in an incident incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make a slight flow of blood as much as you want.
And then strengthen with poultices and leave it thus until it is healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More, of the two arterial veins that are at the temples, the treatment of bloodletting is for ancient and long-standing migraine and obtalmia and chronic overflow of acute fluids to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrict the patient's neck with a motive until the two veins appear at the sentiment for manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse beneath the finger; and then you will feel it.
And then you raise the codeina above the vein to the parts above with your finger indicating, and insert the bloodletting incidentally beneath, and raise the vein in its place; and insert it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then you release the constriction of the patient, and stop your finger on the vein for an hour, and then stop over that spot with poultices and strengthen it above with a strong constriction, and leave it thus until it is healed.
And previously remembering the remedies, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
Thus the juvenation of phlebotomy on the vein of the forehead is appropriate for the phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and to purge rotten and foul ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is according to what you have recommended to yourself; thus it is that the patient strongly holds the seat with a bandage inside so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the shape.
Pause at the prominent point where the head of the lancet is above that vein and puncture it with a pen or another instrument in your hand, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and hold it inside so that it may be healed.
And some veins are opened in phlebotomy, however it is not seen that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus with the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a fat extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and fortifies the trench in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
The juvenation of the two veins that are like the lacrimal of two eyes for cleansing the eyes from rot and pus in the eyes, and for ancient evils of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strongly holds the seat with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand steady over the head of it.
And make the phlebotomy according to the transverse, a little along the length of a small phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, it fortifies the extremity of it which is wounded.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on that spot, and hold it for one night, and then release it.
The phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and violent sweat, and for ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and purge rottenness that accumulates in the face, and it is more effective when it is ancient.
And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that the patient strongly holds the seat and then place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle lancet long and fixed in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
You see that you ultimately put your hand on the small phlebotomy little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because it is restored gently.
The juvenation of phlebotomy on the two guiding veins leads to constriction of the wings and beginning of leprosy and many ancient evils and impetigo and bad corroding ulcers, thus with herpetiform.
And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that the patient strongly holds some cushions under the seat with a bandage; and the artisan stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then phlebotomize the vein along with the phlebotomy, little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then release the bandage and hold the two veins with a moderate stricture so that the patient is not suffocated, and let it enter into the morning because the wound is healed.
And the juvenation of phlebotomy on the Algerian veins helps against small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and against bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that you make the patient sit down before you, and hold the seat with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of it and look at the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of the two, and that is why in the circle of those small black veins; and then insert each one for an incisive incision.
If you have doubt below you, and do not know which one is of those, then you proceed to the incision of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest pus of those.
And make it similar to the two veins that are on the lips above.
The juvenation of the two veins that are below the tongue is to approach phlebotomy of the cephalic to suffocations that are in the throat, to the evil of the uvula, and to evils of the mouth.
And the quality of bloating in those is that it follows the patient between their hands in front of the sun, and raises their tongue, and looks at the back of their tongue, from one vein on the left and another vein on the right, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then bloating occurs in each; and beware that you do not ultimately put your hand in bloating those, because then those are arteries.
And your veins that are bloated in the body are those that usually correspond to all the homes, and the bloating of them is done according to two methods, or they put the bloated mirtilat or olivar at a declining subtlety; or they dissect the bloated cutellar, and appeal to its gentleness, and this is their form.
It is the side of that thus sometimes, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding apparently gross, and at those that contain gross turbid blood.
And this bloating is of lesser latitude and of purer subtle extremity, and converges to bloating of subtle veins that contain pure subtle citrus blood.
Moreover, the juvenation of the bloating of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the bad humors that are beneath the gullet and the colon, and from that which drips down to the chest and the belly.
And it converges to the bloater, when that bloating occurs, that it should guard well that and be above-temperament in that, because then it has an artery, and if it errs and adjusts at the puncture of the bloating, it will incise that artery and accelerate flows of blood, so that it is known that no bloating occurs with a bloater pungent, unless it is secting with gentleness.
And if the basilica does not appear for a manifest appearance, then it is known that you should leave that and move to another, or seek some other branch; or that bloating occurs at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and it is said that bloating with gentleness thus as we have said.
Moreover, if you want the bloating of the thigh, then it is known that within the structure of the arm that you touch the place into which you conjoin the place of the pulses, and place your finger over the spot where you feel; and place the arm and say that the vein in section is concave with gentle bloating thus as we have said; and beware that you do not strike the percussion at some space of the place of the artery.
And when you sometimes, as you stretch the ligament, it swells in the place where you have felt with your finger, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if sometimes the blood flows in the bloating thus as aurora of a child, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you touch and pause the mentioned finger for a long space; and place the mentioned finger, and if the blood is absent, because motas veins are absent, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
And beware of the patient's humor, and be above-temperament of it and do not let that dominate for some days until it is sane.
Moreover, if the blood is not absent, and sometimes you do not present medicine to that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is absent; or you take a thread of fistic, and finish that, and take one vein and stretch it over the place of the vein with descending structure and ligament and pulses until another day.
And then if the blood is absent, good; and if not, then cure that with water of which it is preceded to the reminiscence of the place of the powders that absorbent flux of blood.
And the absorption of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Moreover, from the dark vein the bloating is juvenation that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and to the inferior part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of cephalic, thus as we have said.
And it is known to the bloater that it should be above-temperament in the bloating of it, because then it is a nerve; and then if it adjusts at the puncture of the bloating and touches the nerve, it accelerates to stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and far from being sane, and this nerve many times appears to sentiment; and if it is hidden at some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it is known that you pause the bloating in which you bloated with gentle section, and avoid the nerve with your fortitude.
If the vein is between two nerves, then pinch the vein in its length.
The youthful treatment of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the wheels.
And beware in this treatment, if you want the phlebotomies to purge either olive phlebotomy or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it does not touch the artery nor nerve.
Never emperor, the vein is apostematized in some men, when it is not phlebotomized by the primary percussion, never touch that apostema again.
The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that it be done phlebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, so it is: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near food, when it appears to have signs of fullness.
And let phlebotomy be done on the third day or at first hour after three hours have passed from the morning.
Never phlebotomy that is administered, unless it brings convenience and necessity to it, or of night or of day, at any hour and in any time.
And beware that an infant should not be phlebotomized until he has fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month within the seventh, and the old people should not be phlebotomized those who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some mania, beware that you should purge the evil humors from within before the phlebotomy, lest they retain the retained matter, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous humors in the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not nourish the principal members.
And do not phlebotomize the patients who are nauseous and crapulent, nor those who are evacuated from illness nor those who are in a state of drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor those with dropsy, and beware that phlebotomy is tempered according to colic passion and according to vomiting, and according to pain of belly, and according to multiplication of cough and of trouble and of exercise of fasting or of vigilias and of all cause that dissolves virtue, whether it be corporal or animal.
And also consider in subtlety of humors within it if the blood is gross, with viands and beverages, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And also enter into bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subtled.
And pause the phlebotomy of it at the foot of the day, so it is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
And take care that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents animals, thus as it is anguish, ire, fear, and from all bad accidents corporal, thus as it is trouble and superfluous pain and cough and similar to them.
And at its session, make sure to present the causes in the use of that which corrects customarily in men with aromaticity and odorament and with balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomizer on a cushion that is put above the cushion of the one who must be phlebotomized.
And also extract the evil arm, and touch that one with his hand the phlebotomizer does two or three times; and also stretch the ligament in correction and involve that two times.
And let the structure be tempered, because the structure when it is not equal, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body from the essence of blood.
And also the structure, beware that the one who must be phlebotomized touches their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sentiment.
And also the phlebotomizer anoints the evil phlebotomy with a few drops of oil antic properly; and also pause the evil finger of the left hand above that vein, below the place where you want the phlebotomy, so that the vein is opened a little, and the percussion is seated because one of the veins is the one that attracts thus as a fugitive cord, and of those it is full of windiness and when you pause the phlebotomy on that, it is contracted from the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomizer is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not touch the vein, and if it touches, that is straightened.
And then, because it is necessary that the flow of blood in the veins be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And then stop the flow of blood, if a vein is opened in a passage, then it is good; and if not, you will iterate to another passage below that place on the limb, or above where you are holding fast, if the place is not affected.
And if the place is affected, or the patient's health worsens, then you will leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because the strong traction can cause an aposteme to break out, nor enter into a bath.
And then iterate the phlebotomy if the love (or affection) is present.
And if the perception is small and you subtly feel the blood flowing beneath, and you fear that it will not flow in the quantity that you want, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and make sure to hold fast underneath so that the place does not become affected, because the place becomes affected in many homes due to scanty perception.
Perhaps sometimes that already has become affected, then do not iterate on it, because it does not excuse you from any cause; and stop on that certain part of the wound of the olive oil, because it alleviates the body's blood flow. And it is better in this place with olive oil than with other oils.
And similarly, administer the olive oil throughout the entire phlebotomy, in which phlebotomies the veins are prohibited from the body's blood flow, and make a tyrical and sagzenous effort when it is stopped on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtly irritated and revolved when it is gross.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a great aposteme is generated, because many passages are closed, and mainly to that which has not been blooded except for that passage, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you stitch, and stop on the place, applying an infusion of warm water and salt, a slightly scaled area, and hold it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And then, it is necessary that you stop the flow of blood from that vein in completion with it or another vein.
And if you remain in the place for some days with some blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you wish, stop on that certain cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calendula or similar to it.
And many passages are closed, thus apostemes and eminences of the phlebotomy of the basilica.
And then stop your hand over that, and if then you apply a mild compression over that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you stop on that certain cause of what we have said, because the strong flow of the artery's blood.
And make an emplaster on that in which it is stipulated, so that the place may be endured, and then heal that wound with another healing treatment until it is sanctified.
And then, it is necessary to extract from the blood of every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Because if the blood is black, then you will let it issue until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you will let it issue until it is subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acuity of it is stopped.
And then it is necessary for that which is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a passage, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomist be wide.
And in that which is fragile, make the contrary of that, and then extract it in many passages, and that the tract be straight.
And the better way to administer phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not punctured.
And this manner of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And in which it is customary to overcome syncope from phlebotomy, and then you cure that during the phlebotomy with a small infusion of milk or of oxymel simply scaled; and extract the blood in three passages or four.
And if it is of complex composition, then take during the phlebotomy to infuse in an essarop of myrrh or in an essarop of aromatic mel, with special spices as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an essarop aromatized and very odorant.
And if you fall into syncope from phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issuance of much blood, then it is necessary to take in drinking cold water with an essarop very odorant and subtle; and use aromaticity with galen, and limit the siege of the feet in that.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division on the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
And if one wants to evacuate the liquid from the arm and dissolve the second evacuation of blood, it is necessary to apply the flebotomy for a moderate evacuation, and the strength of it is frequent, which evacuates the small amount of blood little by little, according to the quantity of strength in the continuous days.
And if one wants to evacuate the liquid from the arm, and give the second vein, and the body is strong, then do so at about 8 or 9 hours of the first phlebotomy.
If one wants to attract the blood from the body to the opposite part of the affected area, it is necessary that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
If the body in which there is much blood that has been wasted and is heated and makes fever, it is necessary that it be given a large quantity of its own blood at once, and that the perception within is amplified so that it synchronizes with the symptoms; for you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse of the body's blood, so that no mortal danger occurs in the place of synchronization, because many evacuations are given when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein has closed and it is very difficult to extract the blood, for you press underneath with great vehemence and the extension becomes longer, because this is too bad.
Having the lancet inside so that it is phlebotomized a second time; or remove what has been heated by the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on top of that tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress with a ligature inside so that the blood is not issuing out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation is calmed.
And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then prick that spot or on another arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in the place of the fork or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient inserts their hand in warm water until the vein becomes apparent and manifests itself clearly.
And then it should be strengthened over that limb with a strict ligature; and phlebotomized according to the small transverse, not laterally nor longitudinally.
And it should be a broad perception and your phlebotomy is the one in which you phlebotomize that on the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you obtain what you need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water, and it is customary to place the body of the blood in warm water during winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is more salvageable than all the other veins, because it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is convenient for the illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you strengthen your hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have placed it in warm water, until the vein becomes inflated and is well demonstrated to the sight; and then phlebotomize transversely; and if you insert it all at once, you will not feel anything in return.
And be careful not to ultimate your hand in phlebotomy, because then it is the nerves of the fingers that are denuded of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then stop on the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly, it is necessary that you do everything in a straight line.
If the juvenation of phlebotomy of that on the left hand is convenient for the illnesses of the spleen.
And it does similarly in phlebotomy as one has done on the other.
And the juvenation of the cephalic vein in phlebotomy is for illnesses that are on the lower part of the body, as well as for motherly illnesses, and for retention of menses, and for illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs, ancient and similar to those illnesses.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that it enters the cold foot with warm water and makes a friction on that spot until the veins appear; and it is above the joint of the foot in the course; and the place where the vein gives the said poultice, and from there it ramifies into the facial part of the foot, almost reaching.
So we give a full poultice to the pus and apply it to the leg where the ankle is, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you apply the poultice to the facial part of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath the facial part of the foot, and pause your poulticing on the traversing area, lest you wish to injure it.
And let the poultice be warm.
But if it is prohibited to stop the flow of blood; then you iterate the patient's foot in warm water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the poultice-maker makes an error in the first dressing, then iterate with the poultice in a small area, because the place is healthy; and do not fear the evil magic, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make a poultice on the corresponding part of the other foot in equilibrium.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said above the ankle at the juncture of the woody partition.
And the aid of the poultice of the patient is a remedy for when it is due to blood being drawn out by cauterization.
And the quality of the poultice of the patient is that it enters in a bath, and it fortifies and strengthens the patient's body from the waist to the ankle below, for about four fingers' width in a long subtle band, so that it appears only through that.
And then when it appears, then you poultice that according to each engineer that is possible for you and according to the traversing, and it is better; or inject that for injection or section that for sectio, because the place of the patient is healthy.
And it is in most homes very familiar; and if you touch that, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then poultice some part of the patient, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular and annular veins.
And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you wish.
And then release the tension and pause over the place of the poultice, and strengthen the place, because the relaxation is healthy.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventilations are of corns, or of herbs, or of glass.
And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, because one is with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, of which one in which the ventilations are paused is at the ankle; and the middle place of the neck between two parts of the collarbone; and ventilations below the mandible just below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavilhas; and ventilations of two cuoyssas.
And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch virtue through those, just as it is done for poulticing; nor do they believe that ventilation should be done with fire or without fire in any illness made by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuity, we will administer that at every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time it is.
And then when it happens in any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command that ventilation should be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
The youth of the swelling in the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and at that point it is deep in the veins; moreover, it is necessary to evacuate the entire body.
And this swelling is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic (head).
And it is not lawful to use that which is of complete friction, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great annoyance.
And therefore it is not suitable to use those veins, and in the ends of which there are bad, faulty frictions.
Moreover, to the one who continues above it is made forgetfulness; and therefore it is suitable that you command the sweller to remove his hand a little from the affected parts below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Moreover, the swelling of Alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and constriction of the ale, and scission of the instrument of ale, and to those, and replenishment.
And it is suitable that the Alkehel swelling be reduced a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
And the swelling of Alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and obtundity, and emigration, and foreclusion, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilisk.
And it is suitable that you command the sweller not to press his hand on scarification, lest he incises the artery and accelerates flows of blood.
And the swelling below the chin confers acidity in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to those bad frictions that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the alihelic vein that is in both lips.
Moreover, the swelling that is made on both spatulas confers a captivation, which is made for replenishment of heat.
And the swelling of both divided parts of the focils confers youth of phlebotomy of three veins, thus it is of the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those veins plus manual ones that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins enter so that the attraction goes to the three veins.
And command the sweller not to proceed too much in scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below it there are nerves and arteries.
And it is a swelling that is swollen above the hips and confers hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
And it is suitable that you command the sweller to be a large swelling, and that it be of iron, because the place indicates a strong desiccation; and strongly those subtle swollen veins are scarified in scarification.
Moreover, the swellings of the minor veins are manifested by minuiction, because they attract the blood from the entire body, and confers ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke the menses, and confers to bothor and ademil; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two saphenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
Therefore, I will debilitate the entire body and cause syncopy in many homes.
And of the swellings, Alahorcoben youth is proposed to the youth of the swellings of two veins.
And the quality of the position of the swellings is that it pauses the swelling at the beginning of the vein and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the swellings, moreover, it pauses those ligaments, and remains those coagulated, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious engorgement. And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already enraged and inflated, and that appears the rigor of the blood.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh and rare pores, it is suitable that you scarify him moderately and not too much, lest the place be ulcerated.
And command the sweller to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction with facilitation.
And if the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify two moderate ways, because in the first way it opens the path of subtlety to the blood and to its fluidity. Moreover, in the second, there is a perscrutation acquired from the extraction of gross blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then let the third scarification be made for it conquers the remainder.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should scarify in many places; and if we know that the blood is abundant, then it is necessary to scarify beforehand by scarifying abundantly.
And the term of scarification in which lies the depth of the cord just as much alone.
And if the cord is thick, hard, dark, and the juices are very strained, it is necessary that the places of the cupping glasses are not tender, opened with resolved [purposes]; if it is in summer, thus as it is oil of aloeswood or oil of violets, or oil of bitter chamomile, or oil of cinnamon; and if it is in winter, then it is narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of blood, and to those that seem [similar].
And if the surplus is great, fresh, then the oil should be marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloe wood, or oil of aniseed, and to them that seem [similar].
But if the cupper is of ample pores to tend to flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and it is necessary that the places of cupping are washed with warm water or fresh water from a solar still, or water from a cistern, or water from a gutter, and similar to those.
And if the blood is of much humidity, wash its cupping glasses with vinegar and water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And if the surpluses are great, wash its cupping glasses with vinegar and water of sanicle, which is marjoram, or of decoction of aniseed, or of chamomile, and to them that seem [similar].
And it is necessary that the cupping be kept away from wind; having care that it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it is necessary that one sleeps close to the cupping.
What is it that should be governed, so that the blood-letting operator is regulated before the cupping.
It is necessary to consider the beginning: then if the cupper or he who should blood-let is choleric and vents upon the agitated and inflamed blood, then it is necessary to take causes of cooling, thus as mild acidic grains, and endive in vinegar and laytuguas, and scamabin, and julip, and similar to those.
And pause their wanderings thus as poultices, and flesh of golden sewn seams, and wandered condiments with grains, and to those that seem [similar].
And if the complexion is fresh, it is necessary to take in drink essaroop of golden milk, or essaroop of scamabin seeds, and sumac, and with much odorant mixture between viel and noel; and that it be commended to use a little of drinking and eating, and pause the wanderings of its poultice and canabir and pissers and small seams and columbat.
And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and blood-letting the drink should be more than the food.
And it is necessary that it be given to drink in certain hours to certain homes tyrical aphorisms, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alcita away from the cupping or away from blood-letting or near, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtled; and it is not necessary that they take that scaldfath.
But the cuppings that have scarification are cuppings that are paused on the feet, and on the ankle and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pustule of the anch, because these members do not suffer from scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from a member, thus as pausing cupping on the mamilha in bad flux of blood of the blood of the veins; and we use that so that the fresh cupping is dissolved, inviscated from the member, thus as pausing on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scales off the pain, resolving cupping.
And then it is paused on the kidneys when they are inflamed in their operation or stone, because by virtue of strong attraction the kidney's operation is fortified and eradicates the stone from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is paused on the feet and ankle, which must have cupping in those enclosed places.
And these cuppings are administered with suction as much alone; and some are administered with fire.
And some are administered full of water of tepid warmth in the bad fluxes of the ankle.
And that is why the cupping should be filled and should be more grand, thus it is warm water alone or water in which are cooked herbs for that convenience.
Form of cupping administered with fire: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the pricking should be the width of a palm; and let it be in the fat of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the width of it, the prick should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
It is fitting to place a warm poultice of rough texture, with large margins, lemon, and bitter herbs, so that the member does not deviate from its proper position.
And it is at the middle of the transverse vein of the arm or iron, where a candle is placed above the fire.
And this is the great remedy that we have recommended; and the small portion of it according to the illnesses and the state of he who uses it.
And the cupping glasses of the elderly are extinguished, as others are those of the young and of large corpulent bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping glass over the member is that it extends the flame of fire decently downwards into a small candle made of wax, and place it above the middle of the transverse vein in the middle location of the cupping glass, so that the fire may be kindled around the part below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is placed over the member of the patient, and the finger is on the spot that we have mentioned, until when you have the cupping glasses and do not indicate that they obstruct the finger and release the vapor above that spot, then the cupping glass will be almost dissolved.
And adjust the flame according to its manner, and remove it if it is indicated by that.
Sometimes a cupping glass is administered in the case of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse vein nor spot, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member only superficially.
And this is its form: This cupping glass, when it is larger, is better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 148.
Blood-letting is not administered in many members except in those where it is not possible to place cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum, which are similar to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similarly.
And the quality of using those that you have found blood-letting cups that are in the stagnant waters of mundane poisons.
And then they are soaked in stagnant water during the day and night until they are famished, and that no remnant of the cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through flea-botany and cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it becomes red; and then they are placed over him.
And when they are filled and fallen.
And if it is possible to suck from the place of the cupping glass, it is more desirable in juvament (treatment).
And otherwise, then wash the place with a gentle hand and then with much water; and it is cooled and expressed.
And if the body of the blood is prolonged by the administration of blood-letting cups, and it is that which remains, then you soak a piece of linen in cold water, and place that over it until the remaining fluid is absorbed.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or gall and similar things to those of stiptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the spot the seeds of roasted fava beans, and soak them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the blood is absorbed.
And similarly, if it is necessary, repetition of blood-letting cups, when it is possible to change them.
And if the blood-letting cups are prohibited from suspension, then cool the spot with recent blood or fix a needle in the spots until blood comes out; and then they are placed, because those who feel some blood almost immediately recover.
And when you want them to fall, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash, and it will happen almost immediately.
Thus begins the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, you should know that many foolish doctors and vulgar people, who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of them.
And for this reason it is fitting that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten anything in a long time being entirely forgotten; and I have not acquired what comes after, except through the longevity of reading the books of the Ancients and studying with understanding, until they extract the science from them.
And then I direct my experiment and study throughout the longevity of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which has passed my experiment; since here I abbreviate it to you others and deliver it from the occupation of elongation; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus I have done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary precautions are, before we begin remembering the fractured members and diverse injuries. It is fitting then that I should define in the proem of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which in the beginning are forced by the craftsmen and stationed over the truth of these; so it is you and those who are so prompt that they may know or apprehend this noble art other than you.
And therefore I say that when accidents occur due to a fracture or dislocation or bruise or fall, then it is fitting that you should take care at the beginning with flea-botany or alleviate that, or whatever symptoms, if no cause prohibits it, thus with debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or viel in decrepitude, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And you should be content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meats of birds and of crab-fish; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and all diet that fills the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostema caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their primary regimen as they were accustomed to it before.
And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is fitting that the patient should be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and light food, avoiding those which are viscous, thus as they are fed with foods made from flour, such as bread, rice, caps, fish, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar things, and in this regimen is made coagulation of fracture pus, with gentle movement and milk.
And you know that the broken bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first decay and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they can be continued and consolidated according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
But the imperial nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause to glue in which it is grossly strengthened that adheres and strengthens until they are completely consolidated and united, until they reach the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that from their works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, thus as we have said.
And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, because fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I have come to a remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in their own distinct chapter separate from the others.
Various diversity of fracture in itself. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; because it is made arcuate fracture another that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made fracture according to the longitude of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and stellar and additional proceeding and not-proceeding, thus as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is fracture fissure petty.
And to each species is born or torment proper in restoration of the bone according to that which will come remembrance of it distinctly in their own places.
Sign or indication of fracture of the bone. And for that it is known as fracture of the bone: it is twisting of it, and of that prominence and appearance of it to the feeling, and so of it when it comprehends that in your hand.
And then when it is not in the twisted location apparent nor does it feel deviated from the proper touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that it is a twisted or small fissure, therefore you do not feel that you manipulate it with your hand and with total compression; pause over it from the medicines of which you have remembrance at that moment which convenes to the place; and then it will be straight for subtle stricture.
And you know that the place where it is arcuated and not separated into two or another that does not occur in the sagitta, thus as it is manipulated totally by its own comparison, then it is fitting to begin from your hour of rectification of it, because it will accede to apostema caution.
And if it accedes to apostema caution, then it will leave that for some days until the apostema ceases; and then you should engage that according to whatever manner you can of levitation and of engendering.
You should know that restoration of it and agility of it are more desirable than the bone in which the accident occurs.
And then strengthen that second [part] which will bring back the memory of it.
Perhaps in the bone so shattered, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or take your hand if the member is small; or take two cords or one cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you hold the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you perform so that they return to their proper place and according to each manual skill that you have in their places.
And beware that you do not fall on the patient during your operation, nor harm them; and perform according to your gentle power that you apply one bone with another in their companionship, according to their best forms.
And it is opportune that at that hour you touch with your hand there, and if sometimes here some diverse cause, rectify that and straighten it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors who have caused aposteme through their operation, or have caused contraction in the member, just as we have seen that through the operation of their foolish methods.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because you should know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the toe, and similar to those, then it is opportune that the enveloping be with a very subtle wrapping.
Perhaps those that are large, such as the hip or the leg, it is opportune that in those there be a strong and hard enveloping, because the strong connection connects the great member and strengthens it entirely in equal structure, so that in it no morbid matter enters.
And then begin, then your evacuation of equalization, pause the convenient liaison according to that, on the place of that fracture with three envelopings or four according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little at the liaison.
And then see that you go to the part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen less so that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture. And then elongate yourself in the enveloping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure little by little, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other wounded part over the broken place with an enveloping, and then see to the envelopings at the part above below the fracture; and be your operation in the structuring of the enveloping and in softening of it according to what we have said in the first enveloping above.
And then pause between the turns of stopping the lion or wrapping with which the tortuousness of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuousness in it; and if not, do not pause for any cause.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize over these envelopings decently made so far, if in the place there is no inflammation or aposteme caused, and then pause on it that sits the aposteme and that removes the inflammation; and lay it aside for some days; and then you strengthen over the same stalks.
And these stalks are of the majesty of a cane of strong race, and be formed wisely; or they are of wood of pine; or of palm branches; and let the amplitude of each stalk be according to this form and figure.
However, it is opportune that the stalk which is paused over that fracture be thicker and stronger a little than the other stalks, and the length of the stalk according to what is suitable for the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the stalks with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind beneath decently according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more elongated from the fracture, it mends less the structure.
And it is opportune that the threads are middle-sized in thickness and subtlety, and are of soft wool; and if the threads are thick, just as I have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors pausing the threads of cord from the tortuous, and it is a great error, when one loses the structure outside of equalization.
And the examination of subtle feelings is not so convenient, because you do not constrain them by structure as those that you want, and it does not happen that between this and that there is a measure of a finger.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to place the structure in their own places, then stop those of stopping the lion or the caramelized hand within so that it does not make a lesion.
Some bruised fractures are a plague, and accidents disrupt the code, and you will find a reminiscence in that capital according to singularity.
And you know that all broken members are not straight on the first day; the cause is that the member, when it's large, does not fit onto the stars until five or seven days, according to your careful observation of the advent of abscess.
And this is the manner of the splint-makers among whom the Ancients restored, who placed them on fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Method of splinting as an aid to restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major wounds on women and children, because it is about the one that does not allow heat or cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
And you comfort it in this way, unless you remove the crust from the egg white, and place the complexation of it without space or subtlety; and then use that.
Another manual for implanting and restoring fracture and dislocation: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is a mixture of millet salvage, one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one drachm; of alochil one drachm twenty; all are triturated and mixed with water or album of egg white if the complexity of the patient's wound is shallow; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite easily, and confers a lot of relief.
Another manual for implanting which confers on fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and a half drachm of white altea; of myrrh and aloes one and a half drachms; of acacia one and a half drachms; of Armenian bol two and a half drachms.
All three trissatz in mortar with the very contracting motion, and three crust-removers, and three comforters in the water or in the egg white, and it is administered.
Method of splinting for joints and separated bones in their own places, and then accidental pain occurs in those and cracks and fractures: take the whole suture and submerge it in warm oil and cook it and place it on the location.
More in this splint, there is no virtue of restoration, of careful abscess and expelling pains properly.
Another method of splinting that restores broken bones: take threads of fig tree sort and threads of salvaged poppy; mix all together and make a splint of their own.
Method of splinting administered to restore fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: recipe mixture of alta, of chamomile and violet flowers, of wheat flour, of all one part. all three trissatz and three comforters in wine, if the member is not scaly.
More if it is scaly, then comfort it with water of sweet colander or with water and use that.
Another method of splinting which is strong in resolution that this first, when it helps abscess hard to restore the member: recipe of mixture of alta and of sesame of liar, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, violet flowers, of chamomile, of all one part; all three trissatz and three comforters in water of sage or in water of two or in wine, all that according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
More, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free art that it is placed on the broken member for its restoration, unless a wax figure is made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommends that it is mixed between thickness and subtlety.
More, Galen says that it is seen that they are placed on the broken member for its restoration, and the causes in which it is dryness of small heat, thus also with myrrh, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
For the treatment of painful limbs that cause pain: take mixture, of cedar, of hazelnuts, of pine seeds or filberts, and of salt, partially ground; and make a poultice with wax and resin, and apply it skillfully.
Measure the quantity according to which you think that the ligament is relaxed and then dislocated, it is that you consider if there is no accident, nor bruising, nor the bone is broken, nor it has moved from its place, then do not delay more than a few days. And if you encounter a violent pain or bruising or inflammation at the location, then take care of it immediately, and remove the poultice from it.
Take a cloth of linen and marine sponge, humid and soft, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the location until the bruising and pain cease; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place a poultice made from lard and oil or rose oil, spread over the area, and let it stay there for a night until you are sure of the apostemic caution, and that the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply a subtle and gentle structure with a small poultice, not too strong for your primary constriction, and subtly introduce it until it is healthy.
And if the aposteme and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents have been completely alleviated, and you are free from poultices and structures, then apply it in this way as you did at the beginning of the treatment.
And if you do not encounter any of the causes mentioned earlier in the limb, then do not delay it for three days or four or five; and some remedies have been left out, which are applied for 20 days according to how it appears per the dislocation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust it in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and adjust it in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
More often if you find the location of the fracture is dry and thin, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore embrocate it with warm water every two hours; and let it be so for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and through this operation correct the limb's nourishment, and it will be healthily restored.
More often it happens that the foolish restorers of the limb's fracture do another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to what they know, and it is restored according to their own twistedness, it is an error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if they were directing it, they would increase the Ancients' books and would have done that work.
And I have not seen anything of theirs that they do, because it is more reasonable that they do nothing.
Chapter according to: Of the fracture that occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion pushes all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, just as it happens in the chest, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the spine enters into a part of the bone, and enters into its flesh and does not pass into its back; and this species of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contracted or compressed; and the cause of it is percussion with a poyle or fall onto a stone, and its symptoms are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little.
And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like fracture, and for this reason it is called this species of capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of the stone and its symptoms are similar, which makes enter some layer of the bone into the inner parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it happens to the edges of the eram when they happen to their percussion and it is parted from their entrance into the inner parts.
And mostly it happens in the bodies of human bones, just as it happens to the heads of elephants.
And thus all these species of fractures are categorized, they are weights just as they are separated stars. And I will find remembrance of all that in its place.
And I will recognize all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that are over them.
A special type of hair-like material is recognized because it is discovered over the bone, and it is absorbed, and limited around the tender area, since the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that signify manifest signs over pain, such as vomiting from colic, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and efflux of urine, and rigor of those, and similarity to their accidents in major predispositions, they do not depart from health.
And if you see non-concurrent accidents you despair of health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that it has come to you in the beginning as a plague and it is during the winter days, then you should study the ostentation of the bone within thirteen days according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer days, then you should touch the bone within seven days, having care that the bone not be corrupted by the panicle, and that the accidents which we have recounted do not occur.
And if the fracture has penetrated to the panicle covering the brain, and it is with divided and atrophied parts, then you should incise the divided and atrophied part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner possible to you, according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, whether with an abundance of blood or aposteme caution, then you oppose yourself to him who has need, and it is that you fill the place of drawn-out infusions in wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until it be seated the aposteme, and you are secure from abundance of blood; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you incise the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision, a little wider later than that; and this is its form.
And then administer more incisions wider than the one according to the rule.
And it is necessary that you have different names of diverse incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or felt.
And use them to facilitate percussion over the incision so that it does not touch the head and leads to that.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of it within that you administer the incisions with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
And they are not called thus but because those do not reach the term of the bone to that which is next to it, so that the trowel is round-ended or margin on that which is beneath the head of the agout-like margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the narrowness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these trowels, a great number of which almost converge on the narrowness of each bone, until it be present to you in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is pointed, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of narrowness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of trowels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the trowel over the bone and revolve it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then you permit the trowel to another place, and pause what is between all the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment around.
And then you incise with incisions what is between each tract of the bone, and make it more subtle that you place on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or at your hand, or for some other cause among several instruments which will be prepared for that, as we have done, and forceps subtle.
And it is necessary that you keep with all caution that the incision does not touch any cause of the cephalic.
And thus you will have circuited the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cephalic if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to razor and equalize that in the asperity of it from what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision, but more imperious, because it is more thin and more subtle than the other incisions.
And if you remove some part of the small bones and cartilages, then take that which is facilitated in what is necessary for you of the instruments; and then cure the plague with ointments and anointing those which we have said.
And the other manual operation is to evacuate, far from fear, which Galen and the majority said was for great relief; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary for you at the commencement that commences to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed it beneath the extremity of this insensitive and light instrument, which is the form.
It is that the lunar part is slow and does not cause any harm, and the acute part is of it in two lines beforehand in length, thus at times; so that the lunar part be adjusted to the ciphac on the face of the incident acute bone.
And then you pierce over the instrument of a part with a small hammer until you have divided the whole bone easily, thus as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not fall into the accident that you fear in no way, and if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Then if you remove any annexed cause from the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, you will cut that of it with the extremity of the instrument, and you will deliver that of it easily, because it is delivered from its nocuments and its fears.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is absent or separated from the bone is its face, and remains in its asperity and subtle stagnations, then it is necessary to remove that asperity and eradicate those stagnations with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places most convenient to their direction and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary to administer in your razor at the time when you make the bone begin with the most latent of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from what follows in continuity until you have obtained to administer the whole tone and the whole subtle part of all those.
More in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you perceive for rectification of it.
And it is a cause that has not been diminished over all those which have studied in that art. And I will stop on what we have written and shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is retracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in warm rozat, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and warm rozat, and place it over the primary drap so that you can do the most gentle operation possible on that, which does not graze the ciphac; and then administer over that liament slowly, and do not stretch it unless for the quantity that the wound has solely.
And leave that in this care for one day or two until you are secure from apostemic caution; and then dissolve it and administer medicines as those which suppress excessive dryness, thus with linseed oil and flour of barley, and powder of gum and aristology, and similarly to those.
And it is that you make from these powdered medicines a powder to be sprinkled over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of envy or another; nor should you allow virulence to aggregate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and destroys it, and falls upon the malaute with that malignant malice.
And it falls upon the ciphac of the head, as it is mondified by the bone and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the malaute with the accidents that we have said, knowing that they are perilous and totally opposite.
And if it does not blacken except from the medicine that is placed beneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackening, then it is necessary to take of honey a part and of warm rozat in three parts. and with those liniments make a drap, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge until it is sanctified.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that it is not broken in the nose unless two parts are simultaneously injured, or one of those hollow veins, because there are two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
If one of the two broken parts is torn away, then be careful that you introduce the small finger into the wounded nose, and that you rejoin that fracture with the same indication, and with the same pus before, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do it for yourself to facilitate, and beware that you don't fall into that operation on the patient's painful limbs.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then be careful that it is equalized with the extremity of a rod on which is a small groove.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the limb in a position of rest with the help of an apostematum bandage.
And insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth from it, if the fracture is in one part, or two small calipers, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the large groove of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers who had calipers inserted in wood, and were permuted throughout the day, but it was not seen by me; however, I have found that the piece is inserted into a wooden box as if comforting with powder of mulberry; and then place the caliper until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And some veiled ones are inserted into the nose, in place of a caliper, almost like a hawk's claw, enveloped with cloth from the lion; and it is that you already have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, use calipers.
And if you happen to have another veiled apostematum bandage, plaster the nose with cerate or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilion.
If you do not happen to have an apostematum bandage, then be careful that you plaster beforehand with flour of Sizamum and powder of crushed horns in a wooden box; and then place it over the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments or are comminuted, then be careful that you collect them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the suture, and cure it in a way that encarnates and consolidates, and plaster it in a convenient way.
And if you happen to have a wound inside the nose, then be careful that you cure it with calipers and administer lead tubes until it is completely healthy.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a wound, be careful then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two and curved to the internal parts, then its treatment is easier.
And be careful, therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, that you introduce the index finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and press gently with the finger on the inner part of the fracture to facilitate the repositioning of the parts beforehand, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; and in this way you will equilibrate the bone.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then be careful that you administer extension of the two parts according to a straight line until it is possible to achieve equilibrium.
And if you happen to have conmotion of teeth to dislocation, then strengthen those which you think will remain in a thread of gold or silver or copper; and then place over the broken jaw cerate, and place over it a double layer of cloth, and place over the large star-shaped cloth decently made, or a piece of sole leather along the length of the jaw; and then tie it underneath according to how you have prepared the binding of it and how you apply it, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and stop eating the food of the lions' sorbs.
And if you think that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then be careful and delay it until the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and plaster it with powder of mulberry, or with flour of Sizamum, or with powder of crushed horns in a wooden box, since you will have removed the cerate from it, and placed over the plaster the lion's paw.
And then add cum sta annex and adjust that plaster over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, so that it does not dislodge until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many veiled fractures are straightened in three weeks.
And if another viewing accident occurs, then administer what we have said in the aforementioned method for soothing the patient's interior so that it may be healthy and the aforementioned aposteme may be removed.
And if the fracture is a painful wound, then consider whether it is a separated or reunited bone, and subtly examine those reunions to see what is convenient for the removal of those instrumental parts.
And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then amplify it with a flesh-botometer according to the quantity of your necessity.
And when you have finally removed those reunions, and they will not be reunited again, then close the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the suitable emplausters that are convenient for that and incarnate that, until it may be healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the crucible when it is injured.
Many views are broken, the crucible of the joint is torn apart from the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is torn, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not reunite; and it is easier to restore it; or it is also that they reunite in the instrumental parts, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is also that the fracture is a painful wound.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a painful wound, is that you should have two ministers present, so that one holds the adjuster and supports the torn crucible, and the other extends the veil over that part.
And then bind the fracture with the tightest ties within so that it is made in its form according to what is necessary, and it does not bulge out or become concave.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the thigh of the patient a spatula of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the crucible and shorten the spatula with your hand until it binds the fracture as necessary.
And if you cannot straighten the extremity of the crucible to its former parts, because it has been perverted to the prone position, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place upon the muscle of one thigh a large cushion.
And the minister presses the muscle of the thigh down to the parts below so that the bone of the crucible is elevated as it was in its proper position, and then you straighten the fracture and bind it with the tightest ties.
You feel reunions of the crucible and its majesty, then it is necessary to bend over that and extract those reunions to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision on it with one of the incisors that have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the crucible the instrument that serves the ciphac; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, which is its form.
And it is similar to a knife of which this is the concavity; and its width is according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
You adjust the length of it according to what is possible for you during the operation; that there are two extremities also at times, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you extracted the reunion of the bone is wide, and yet it is sure of careful stitching, then you adjust the two lips of the wound in suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear careful stitching, then you fill the wound with cloth and powders according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
And if you make careful stitching, then put a cloth in good agreement and oil rose and wine, and place it over that.
And thus, that the tablet is not majestically placed over the torn bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, because when the ligament is mollified or the tablet is already reunited, then you straighten that and strengthen the bonding.
And then place the patient's sleeping body on their back, and place underneath them a small cushion at night; so that it may be elevated by the assistant of theirs from the side of that, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to an elevation of the muscle; or their arm will be lifted to their back.
And do not remove the bandage if it does not adhere to the wound or abscess within twelve days.
And then renew the dressing if you have seen their face to that water, and adjust in the structure and restore it thus that it may be restored and the fracture of the furcula may be coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some vegetables given to some men are done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula is broken in the broad part of theirs and does not break unless at the edges.
And then when the part of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of theirs — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture forces you to prepare theirs and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of engineering, which is possible for you.
And then place on the dusty place of many albas of that man and stop the lion; and then place a double-layered cloth of drap; and then place on the starry board of subtle table according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more.
Perhaps if the starry board is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you will engage that concavity with a stopper, and then balance the starry board according to equality.
And then strengthen below with a long humanation by decent construction and firmness of the starry board until it is not removed from its own place.
And consider the bandage every day; and all vegetables that are softened, another vegetable is strengthened and equalizes the starry board if it is removed from its own place.
And let the patient be about their own side thus.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And then when this number is completed, then you will dissolve the bandage, and you will know for certain that it is of the bones which began not to be tender nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the ankle and put underneath the cushion, then you will split above it, and lift it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the furcula with careful attention to the abscess, being cautious so that it adheres here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle place of theirs and that tart endures; perhaps the extremities of theirs move slowly and are comminuted.
And of the accidents of theirs when the middle of theirs is broken, it is that which declines to the internal parts and adheres to the great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and toes, and strengthens and vomits blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sentiment.
And the restoration of theirs is that the patient be resupinated on their own back, and placed between the shoulders of theirs with one cushion; and then press on their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the more than two rib-stops, and subtily proceed in the operation of theirs and in the equalization according to every manner that is possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
And then place on their dressing and stop and place above the starry board of subtle table of sawdust or of chalk and of its similar levitation, since you envelop that in drap; and then subtily proceed to bind that above the broken bone so it is not moved; and go with the binding according to retonditat on the back some vegetables, and strengthen that with decent structure; and then consider the binding at every hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dislocation of that from corrosion or bruising, or pain, or abscess that adheres in the place, then you will cut and dissect that and eradicate the dressing and rectify what adheres for that manner of cure; and then reduce the dressing, if times return to that face; and adjust their structure until it is healthy.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that follow the back; and of the extremities of theirs from the front part do not adhere to those contradictions unless for what is cartilaginous. And knowledge of theirs is not hidden from the sentiment because of the inquiry into theirs with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that it envelops the fracture in the fingers according to the possible method, so that it is enveloped according to what is convenient, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone in its place, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining into the divided parts, then it causes the patient vehement pain and puncture, just as puncture that causes pain to one who has suffered a fall, and because of this, the bone sets in its covering; and it causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is a difficult cure.
And already the Anticodes have been prepared in that matter with many ingenious remedies.
And of them it is said: they cause the patient to take windy remedies that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven out to the divided parts beforehand.
We must avoid giving him that remedy so that it does not cause the gathering of evil humors, if it does not help; and if it does help, then it will assist in that.
And they discovered some of them that were stopped under the windings and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, but most of the time it is feared that the windings attract the superfluities to the place of debilitation.
And they discovered some of them: it is said that the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and powders are placed between the ribs until it is full, so that it is the binding that envelops according to retention; and then the patient is treated with a cure of poultices and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts its covering in punctured pain, they think about the patient, then it is said that they should put a bandage on the place, discover the broken rib, and then stop using that instrument which preserves the phlegm, the remembrance of which precedes, and which facilitates the bone, and extracts it.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a closure, and heal it with plasters until it is sound.
And if it causes divided aposteme, then you should apply a cushion and pour powders in rose oil and place them on the area, and the patient is treated with what is suitable for the divided aposteme.
And it should be raised above the bed where he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine, back, and neck.
Some veiled injuries involve fracture of the neck bones, and similarly they have an atrition, and it is similar to the vertebrae of the back. And with that, it causes harm to some and wants to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, because many times the veins are more mollified and stupified and deadened and cannot move them nor extend nor strengthen them, and when they constrict them in the tender fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the midst of these dispositions it is mortal.
And if it moves them and feels in them a constriction in the fingers and puncture, then you know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to that and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider its weight.
Then if you see that it is mollified, it causes harm to those who have been affected in the same way, and then when they sit on their back, they experience windiness and lack of appetite according to their will, and some veiled injuries are raised above their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not struggle with its treatment.
We must not attribute some cause to those, the cause is worse and more evil.
And the treatment of it is that you perform a sedation of the evil humors that gather above the atrited spine with rose oil sol, or with mugwort of hue and sat; place it on those veiled injuries every day until the evil humors are sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and strengthen it above that wound; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where he feels pain until it is healed.
And if it causes the atrition of the satiated bones or some cause that has already been separated from it, then it is said to secede above the codena and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then heal it with an encarnated remedy for the enguements, until it is healed.
We must if the bone is broken in the last vertebrae, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is said that you should enter the finger of your left hand into the anus, and envelop the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary equilibrium; and then place a plaster on it and bind it, if needed, and strengthen it.
If you feel stagnant humors settled in the patient, then put a warm compress on them, and remove that, and take care to cure the plague as it is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrow (passage).
The bones of the narrow passages are so broken, and if they break, then the fracture is only communicated to the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the divided parts; and it causes great pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it alone, then you bind it according to what appears to you by equalizing the binding until it is assembled to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the loin or has already declined to the lower parts, then you make a plaster over the sick belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have bound it, pause on the plaster, and place a pause on that wooden or cotton splint, and strengthen by stricture over which there is no fear of puncture of fracture nor movement of the splint.
And bind the concavity with water that fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if it causes a hot abscess, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the hot abscess is sedated, and pause on the water that sits over it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus in a convex shape.
And if they are stagnant humors or are communicated, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjutator (helper).
The adjutator is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take a wooden plate of moderate thickness according to this form:
And there are two extremities of two ligaments, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then he puts his broken arm on the wood until it reaches the tiny end of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
And then it is suspended above some heavy cause, or the minister extends that to the lower parts; and then the doctor says that the fracture is in its places most often, until the fracture returns according to its convex shape.
And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their cervical spine and suspends the hand of the neck with ligament; and then he commands two ministers that one of them holds water above the fracture in its places most often; and the other holds the pus below it; and almost all of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with ligament and over that with another ligament, and almost all of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And so if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is fitting that half of the ligament be placed over the cilium and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is fitting that the ligament be placed over that place and over that elbow.
Bind it with facilitated and easy handling, and then when it is bound according to its convex shape and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if it does not cause hot abscess.
But if it causes hot abscess, then loosen the stricture until the seventh day, and pause on the woolen cloth wrapped in seven layers and oiled roses until the abscess rests, and then you strengthen it.
And the manner of strengthening it is that you put a plaster on the fracture, and then you put a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then you adjust the arm on that adjutator, and put your hand open over the shoulder muscle.
And put the cloth and strengthen on the adjutator the arm so that the arm is in its place of stability, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
And then it uses stability.
And it is that which puts on the fracture that stability which is more firm and stronger than the other stabilities; and put between each stability the latitude of the digit, and let the length of the stabilities be according to the breaking with an addition of three digits from all parts.
And then strengthen on the stabilities with the stricture which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture on the place of the fracture be more straight. And when the fracture has been lengthened according to the minor structure.
And so if you observe the positioning of the stars and the structure likewise as we have said at the hour in which you restore the member to its usual situation, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess, then place the structure and the stars within the seventh day likewise as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen at the site of the injury; or it is prohibited to bring food to the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all as we have said.
Moreover, if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be over the stomach.
And apply the warm woolen dressing to the affected area, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the injured member is not distorted or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify all in accordance with your virtue.
And administer the food to the patient according to the order which we have previously mentioned, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover the food of his.
It is customary for the warm application and his leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be loosened and bathed and medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly broken, then you do not loosen the ligament and the stars within a day or within two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; one of them is small and it is the one that supports the hand, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part above.
And sometimes the larger forearm bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
And when the smaller forearm bone is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when the bone of it is broken below the fracture, the breakage of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor to make a small extension to facilitate its healing.
Moreover, if the larger forearm bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the external treatment even stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the figure of the hand in such a way that its restoration and extended extension are supported on a cushion, and the pulse of the hand is at the parts below, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be seated on a wooden chair.
And let there be a cushion placed underneath it in its elevation or inclination, so that the patient does not suffer trouble.
And then the minister extends the arm from the part below to the hand or ligament, and another minister extends similarly from above.
And then the doctor sets the bone in place so that it is reduced to its best figure as much as possible.
And if the breakage of the bone is such that it is dislocated, then you must forcibly reduce all the mass to its place with your virtue.
And if it appears that the dislocated bone is separated and cannot be reduced by your skill, then you should fix it in place and leave it according to the manner which we have mentioned above.
Moreover, if the fracture is a wound, I have already made a special chapter about it, and thus take its treatment.
And if you fear an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be moderate between specification and subtlety, and strengthen the cloth over that with subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerate and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of mulberry in clear water, and then place the stars; and let the star which is placed on that fracture be fixed firmly and strongly.
And know that the number of the stars of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or in both bones together.
And then place your structure over the site of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when more is needed, extend it to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, place the structure a little more softly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture are not very humid, and they do not have any rough or harsh qualities, and it is necessary to strengthen them properly between subtle and gross, just as we have recommended.
Examine the limb and its ligaments for about ten days. And if you find some cause for which correction is necessary, then proceed to correct it in the limb, and then try to straighten the limb with warm water until that correction ceases.
And leave the limb unbound until it rests, and then return to re-establishing the structure.
And if the extraction is already softened and the bone is already re-meshed and resembles those, then correct all that with your virtue.
And consider it more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then try to soften that a little and leave it for several days until it runs towards that nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then do not try to delay it for about 20 days or around that.
And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or at least it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the fist of the hand and of the fingers.
You will know that at the fist of the hand and at the joints of the fingers there is often fracture, and it does not occur to them unless through vigorous and rough movements.
And when fracture or rupture occurs in the hand, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight and level path, according to equality, and then pause his hand over that extension.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor joins them together until they are well-conjoined in good conjunction.
And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, unless an abscess occurs with caution; and then place a star underneath according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth of yours.
But if the bandage is in the divided parts of the belly of the palm, and then it makes a resemblance of a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their palm bandaged; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
And the star of the body is in the cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is in the forward parts, then it is necessary to place underneath a star and another star of the part below on the palm, so that the hand is opened and straightened; and then pause the structure, just as the hand is revolved at the joint between the fingers with ligaments.
And if fracture occurs at the knuckles of the fingers, then it is the finger joint, which should be joined according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, place a small straight beam for supporting, so that the fracture is elevated and not misaligned.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be joined and tied with the finger joint so that it is fixed; or all the joints are according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star, just as we have said in the joint.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess caution and opposition — in the tie and operation — in what is necessary when any cause among those occurs, according to what is repeated in the narrative of it.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip.
The bone of the hip is broken and declared to the sentiment according to what is converted to the part above and to the underlying pus.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his back belly and on his face.
And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
But if it is close to the root of the hip, then the ligament is propped against the outer part of the pelvis, so that the extension settles in itself, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is close to the outer part, then it should be made with the ligament propped against the outer part, and the extension should be at the lower parts.
And then the doctor examines the patient's bones in their joints to see if they are aligned according to natural similarity and if the bones are well-connected for good joint alignment; then he checks if the plaster and structure are properly applied, so that there is no damage to the affected limb. Perhaps there is damage to the affected limb, then you should leave it like that for several days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your usual care.
The structure of it should be made like this: you should wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and down to the root of the thigh.
And insert a long piece of felt between the thigh and leg near the knee joint, and adjust the extremities of the felt to the upper part of the two divisions, and then wrap around the leg and thigh so that it is not too tight or loose with the bandage.
And then stop on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus, and put a star-shaped bandage over the bone of the leg.
And then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and thigh with many folds, so that the structure is consolidated.
And then start to build a strong structure around the middle of the fracture site with three or four wraps, and when you have already strengthened the ligaments at the fracture site, your structure should be smaller and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two extremities of the felt to the lower parts until they reach the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped bandages on the other side so that the ligament is not dislocated from its proper place.
And then leave the structure on that, so that it does not cause corrosion to the affected limb nor apostema nor inflammation and appears similar to those; and if any of these causes occur, then cut away the damaged part, and correct what is wrong, according to what we have said many times.
Perhaps the bone is heavy on the part that is painful, then you should adjust it according to what is possible for you; and if not, put a remedy on it and remove what is superfluous, and care for what has preceded the memory until it is healthy.
And several times it is strengthened that fracture of the thigh with another adjustment to the star-shaped bandages, just as we have said in the auxiliary and in the arm.
Perhaps in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not cause harm to the limping patient; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that they limp for a certain time.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other disposables.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the knee joint.
You know that a fracture of the kneecap of the knee joint is very difficult to heal, and perhaps it causes many annoyances.
Perhaps it causes the fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all this has been stated with great sentiment.
And the restoration of it is thus that it should be adjusted so that what is broken in its parts is reunited with the pieces until it is aggregated and connected according to what is possible for equilibrium, facilitation, and fabrication.
And then stop the plaster and put it around that round star-shaped bandage, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure suitable for that.
And then consider all the disposables that we have recommended in other fractures, just as it is apostema and similar to those in which one opposes an accident with what is convenient for it until it is healthy.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
And it happens to some species of fractures that affect both bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made just like the restoration of the arm, by adjusting, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the lower parts.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes trouble below, and it is one of those causes that are not easily cured.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligamentation of the bones according to that adjustment.
Perhaps somehow, if the fracture of the leg has many serious complications, that the extension should be milder and more gentle, and it alleviates your virtue.
If in the chamber there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the stitches and complete all the tie of operation, then take measures of fustigation from the palm which was placed beneath the causes that were paused in solitude; and thus the fatness of the branches of the palm will be alleviated, not being grasped by the small groceza, and not being touched by the hand, and it will be the length of those according to the length of the chamber, and of the denudation entering beneath.
And then envelop each drap in two enveloping wraps according to its length, and place one on the divided part of the chamber on one side and the other on the other side, and thus from the denudation entering beneath to the lowest location of the foot.
And then leave the two stitches in three places of both extremities and at the middle place, because in this structure the chamber is prohibited from leaning to the right and left side, and it stands for good stability.
And then administer a fustigation of the arm according to the length of the chamber; and it will be placed in the chamber so that it conserves that movement.
And mainly you should beware that you do not make a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
And then consider each day the chamber and study it for later study, and you guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and if some cause of those occurs, then pause and go to what is good for entering into what can be healthy.
Chapter 17.
About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The ankle does not entirely fracture at all; rather the bones of the foot sometimes fracture in some veins; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and do not break unless there is strong traction in the midst of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot undergo fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient pauses his foot on the prepared earth thus as a help.
And then pause one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and enclose those so that they turn into their places.
And then apply an emplaster and stop below, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
And then strengthen that with the foot in a descending structure, since you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which you are inducing.
And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the bandage, because you will find the bones set in place, or reset or relocated, and the operation on those is thus as it should be.
Moreover, if some toes are reset, then restore those, and enclose those thus as you were and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then pause the reset toe in place according to the length of the toe, and it will be placed there for a little while; and then place beneath the foot this table that you have recommended, and strengthen that with a descending structure.
Moreover, if that which is reset of the bones is two or three or more, then you pause on each toe in place according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand upon one of the plates of the table outside the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have discussed; and pause and go to all the accidents with what is good for healing.
Chapter 18.
About the fracture of the hip joint of the woman and of the bone of the perineum and of the vertebrae of the spine.
When the hip joint of the woman is reset, then make that descend in a circular motion, and then incline it to the back of the two small ones, and let it be held from behind.
And then the midwife will support the hip joint from below, and make it in the hip joint of hers thus as a sphere; and then the woman will be concutited, and elevate the back of her small one little by little, because all that is forgotten until it is born on the part of the hip joint thus as a sphere and the reset bone returns.
And then apply poultices on the back of hers, and when she wants to urinate, remove the bottom with facilitated ease, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which it was mixed at the beginning, and then return to her first poultice.
And do thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you wish, take an ovation of egg and strengthen on the trajectory of hers a tube of cane; and insert all the vesicle into her hip joint, and then sufflate in the tube with vertu until the vesicle is inflated within the hip joint, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and stood for several days according to what has been recommended, until it is healed.
When the bone of the penis in men or women is bruised, then administer restoration and agility to the water that has been recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And the water that is not hidden in these close fractures and that few encounter, mostly adds to that which is some study and use and intent of my free motion; because that fracture means you are in major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore intent being.
Moreover, in the wound of the man when it is bruised, take a poultice of water, and put the wound in it; and then pause over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are badly wounded.
It is convenient for that which suffers a bad fracture, and mostly if the bone is large as well as the bone of the hip or of the joint, or similar to that, so that you take care and remove the fragments as soon as possible if the conditions of removal are favorable to you or testify as we have said before.
And if the wound flows blood, then it is necessary that you take care to retain it in this way, so that you powder over the wounded place, if no other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not suffer from abscess.
Moreover, if you suffer from a hot abscess, then you delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed down, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Moreover, if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered elbow, then it is necessary that you perform to reduce it and bend it among your hands as much as facilitated and with little extension.
Moreover, if the extension is not prepared for your hands, then you reduce it among your hands as much as possible in this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take hold of these three or four according to the quantity that indicates for it in the cure of all kinds of fractures.
And let it be rounded, and let it be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over itself during the operation hour.
And let it be of sharp extremity to which the margin is in the six extremities; and let the underside of it be thick and tending towards the middle, and of its greatness within the partitions.
And this is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
So that it is necessary to pause the extremity of the sharp elevated above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And press it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and let it be bent into some equilibrium.
And then it is necessary to bend the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Moreover, if you cannot reduce the bone in all that we have recommended, then insert it in all that is convenient for the bones of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is possible for you.
And then scrape that which remains on the bone of roughness and of small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and then reduce the reduction to the patient with vehement pain ledent, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that because you confer great judgment to the patient.
When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bone, and then submerge in a vi stooping black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the soft wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not make the bone fragile and corrupt.
And then administer stitches in the hour of the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the uncovered wound in such a way that you insert the thread among forks and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware that you do not strengthen the wound on the fracture, because many vain efforts are made by foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting mortification or rottenness, so it is sanity. And if the structure of the tieu is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
If the plague is great or bad, and you fear about that evil accident which has been recounted, and there is pain in the area, then do not cover it with those astellas, but rather make an envelope of thick, rough bandages around the area and strengthen it.
When you have already begun to treat the plague once or twice a day, which has engendered heat, then remove the bandage that you had placed over the affected area in the morning, and administer cooling remedies, following our customary practice of treating plagues, just as we do with tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
It is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague in any morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and cover the member so that it is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow out of it easily.
If the plague has passed many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the arm, then you know that here are signs of small ulcers because they cover the plague in tents. And of those ulcers, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated and touch the member and cause pain, therefore try to incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you find that the plague is stagnant or ulcerous, it is symptoms of corruption and putrefaction, then cover one of those which is convenient for the cure of which the preceding narration was made in the seventh chapter.
And of that which covers the worst sermon and you make present your patience: when the gross is truncated, emollients are placed over the member just like the bones of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction of it four times a day, lest it kills; having laid aside that which prevents, because strong fire perishes if it is treated for 20 days or 30. And then you will cure the plague if you have seen it, and if not, lay aside that one.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of numbness that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Many times this numbness occurs in the vicinity of a healthy fracture, and it increases because it is close to the joints, and it is hindered by the figure of the member; and strongly prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the numbness is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipulated, such as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; in order that you take some of those or all, and mix them so they are stipated with wine, or album of water, or with good agreement, and place it over the numbness in a stop, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
And leave the extrication that does not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the numbness is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decentment, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflated in the members.
Moreover, if the numbness has already been converted into stone and is strengthened and necessitates provoking ostensible contradiction, and then you should divide it by the superior part of the limb, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or cut away that which is in the way until it is removed; and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then Roman law governs the subtle member and frees it according to its own natural nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then Roman law governs the subtle member and frees it, then that is not done except for many causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the liament and of the ligature of the faulty joint according to what is convenient; or for superfluity of structure of the liaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its hour; or for paucity of health in the body of the patient and for debility of it.
And the cure of that is to give food to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer bath; and put gauze and lettuce over it.
And then place a poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation with water and tepid, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of truncated bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own which is convenient.
When you find the member already restored to health from tortuousness and eminence to the truncated bone and numbness, and it is for that fededa in the form of the member, but meanwhile the member is not prohibited from its own natural operation, then it does not cover that you receive the speech of one who existed before that member was newly truncated.
More skilled doctors have set forth remedies and restorers which they have made available in our land; and this operation is most detestable, producing great fear of the sign of which is mortal.
If stiffness and numbness are recent, then it is believed that they are imbued with watery humor in which they are softened by mollifying herbs, and thus they are like fuels of high altitude and roots of the same, and milky, and similar to those; and it should be made into an emplaster of mollifying emplaster, thus making a good dissolution; or that it is taken from the mucilage of the root of the high altitude and is mixed with grey clay of gaulin or oil of cirami, and is emplastered there; or that they take fat figs and are trussed in the wombs of columns, and similar to those of the medicines which are named as consolidating remedies.
And some wounds are dissolved by continuous friction of the ligature which is in the most humid places, and administration of movement to the entire limb should be done at all hours.
If twisting has gone downwards and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked the need for cure with iron, then it is believed that the pus above has ceased and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and something is inserted that suppresses the nodosity of those metacarpals in the bone in subtle incisions, and administration of facilitation is done in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On ulcers in dislocation.
Dislocation is a slipping out of some of the joints in their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings about great pains and lesions.
Therefore, when accidents happen to some dislocation, then it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostematous and very strong in what was done, making difficult the reduction of dislocation.
And for this reason it is necessary that it not be touched nor stretched at the time of apostema, because many weak points come to bring about spasm and sharp pains.
But when that happens, then it is necessary to apply yourself to the flaubotomy of the affected part, and thereby let it rest until the apostema subsides; and thereby the limb should be wrapped in warm water and oil, and thereby reduction is facilitated.
And the whole limb should be cared for with that of which the memory will come back to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and thus mollified a little; or they are entirely dislocated and completed, until they are mollified at the part of the joint until corroding saliva of the affected part and it cannot hold that nor clear its mouth, and its tongue is enveloped in its speech.
But when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major preparations it returns by itself for a slight cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the affected part, and meanwhile puts his fingers on one side of the jaw in the root of the dislocation of the lower jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of one side; or he puts both fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is of two sides, and the other fingers are placed on the most affected parts; and he orders the patient to cease using his jaws and release them from any part; and the minister guides the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated, then administration of evaporation with warm water and oil is necessary, until the reduction of both is made easier and not delayed at all, thus as we have said.
And thus when they return and are guided, and the mouth of the affected part is closed and not mollified, then pause on those pillows of drap in cerote, and it should be made with wax and oil rubbed; and thereby it is facilitated by means of soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be steady between two aurelhes, so that he does not move to the right or left side; and do not force him to eat for any reason; having the healthy diet forbidden, until when the pains are removed and the jawbones are numb, then it is possible to do what one wants.
And that should be administered easily, and do not struggle over the perception of the mouth's opening, eating and drinking, until the jaw is numb and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they are not converted to their proper places, then many vigorous febrile efforts should be made, and strongly heated soda should be applied, and the patient's belly should be strongly wrapped, and the patient should vomit pure cholera.
And when you see that, then you will know it is a loss; and many vigorous efforts will die in that which falls within 10 days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint behind the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated forward, and that is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is when the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
And then pause on that plaster and poultices and strengthen it.
But the extremity of one who has a hernia and is continued in it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and reset according to what we have said and according to what you have prepared.
And then pause on that plaster, and poultices, and extraction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this method of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated upwards towards the thigh and downwards.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated to the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts through the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and falls to the lower parts from the thigh, and mostly in those whose flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those whose flesh is thick, it is difficult to dislocate.
And strongly it is necessary to apply percussion or massage to some men, and the patient's muscle is affected by a hot poultice, and it is seized by that which has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you proceed with that until you are certain about the condition of the patient, and then you will proceed with their cure.
And it is recognized the dislocation of it when it is in the lower parts from the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because you find among them diverse manifest differences; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the thigh from the touching of the head of the muscle as if it were a vacuum, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their proper position, nor can they do that for all movements.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, then you will find a clear touching point, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the assistant raises the hand of it to the upper parts; and then pauses with his fingers below the patient's thigh, and strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the assistant raises the hand of it, and extends it upwards; and then pauses it there until it returns easily.
But if it does not return through what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a gentle massage that softens and relaxes, as if it were a coytz root of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused below the thigh, waiting for the moment when it is settled between levitation and strictness, and then the doctor pauses his hand on the patient's spine, and raises the head of the muscle to a straight position, and attracts the patient's hand so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, and another assistant holds the patient's head, so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, because it will quickly return to its proper place.
And if you want, reduce it in this way: and it is that you should be present as a helper to the patient who is more elongated than the patient, and stand on the side of that joint, and insert your hand below the patient's thigh and raise their thigh to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of the back. If the patient is lighter, then it is necessary that I cover what I have suspended for another cause, so that the heavy one returns quickly, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced immediately according to another method: and it is that one fixes on the ground a long stick with a rounded figure, like a pestle, which is neither large nor subtle, and places it under the patient; then, having placed the stick over the head of the stick, the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then extends their hand to the other side of the part; and one strengthens the body on the other side with force, because the joint returns to its own place with velocity.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity which is in length of two arm's lengths, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the edge of the thigh according to this form.
And then place it over the rounded head, tied with strong bands, so that the stick does not escape from the patient.
And then place it under the thigh of the patient, and extend the hand or arm over the stick into the other side, and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a ladder of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the other side, and the other body is suspended from the other part, so that the joint enters soon.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you pause under the thigh a bandage of wool in equal quantity; and then prepare an emplaster made from powder of moly and album of egg white over all the muscle, so that it is revolved from above, and then strengthen below the thigh with decent structure; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and it is left, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be paused for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is lighter at the healing of it.
And then the food is given in greater quantity, and one exercises some movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that accumulates in it or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be administered with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days are spent dissolving the ligament and the joint is not strengthened, and the emplaster and structure are reduced on some occasions, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already inscribed or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its own place.
For the dislocation of that which is made from the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And another structure is administered to it, and it is cured until it is healed.
And if it accumulates towards the healing of the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many baths until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls below the vein or below the touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the corresponding muscle.
And it is necessary that you hasten, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a critical point, because if it comes to a critical point, difficult is the reduction of it, and far from being fully healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of major pain, and many times it leads to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand is extended with two hands, and its arm is expanded, and the hands of the metge are placed over the hip and below it, and the fingers of its own hands grasp the joint, or in the palm of its own hand until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it thus that doubles the hand on its own, until it strikes the elbow at the wrist of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a strong and forceful extension and movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed during the extension.
And then revolve the arm from its entire part, since it is enveloped by a double layer of cloth over his hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until that oil is applied so that it facilitates the causes that help in lubricating the joint and facilitating it; and then strongly massage the joint with a vigorous push until it returns.
And then the reduction of his hip that is placed on that plaster in which it is stiffened and constrained by a wrapping of egg whites, and it is strongly bound with a descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then it is dislocated; and so if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you loosen his bandage and leave it like that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is strengthened; and then loosen it.
If it happens that gravity affects the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the affected joint a compress of warm grass; and then bind it, and leave it like that over the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat it over the affected area, so it is rounded by motion, one time, and the second, and the third. in a warm bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, place on that warm and humid wrapping with a bandage and strongly bind it over that; and do it several times, because it is humid and reduces to its proper disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is slower, and on the contrary it is for other joints, especially because it is necessary to have velocity in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, provided that the place is apostematized or that it falls into an apostemic hollow.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends his hand, and the doctor places his hand or his palm over the vicinity of the joint, and strongly presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Especially because it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one should be intrinsically over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon that vicinity of the joint.
And then it returns soon, good; and if not, then strongly bind it with plaster, closing the apostema and leave it like that; and do not touch it, because if not, it does not suffer nor can it be placed over the reduction of it, since it passes to its days.
Especially the joint is bent according to its twisting; and do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is mollified and cannot hold anything; then you know that the nerves are pinched or torn, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the sake of its treatment and fortifying its confidence.
Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and then loosen it and leave it, and the hand of it should be exercised.
Especially if the movement of it is stopped and gravity affects it, then apply that with warm water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Several times it happens that the toes are completely dislocated.
And when a toe is dislocated from among those on the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then straighten the toe and strongly press the dislocation of it with the toes placed together, until it returns.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
And you should suspend that and extend it inward so that it may be straightened in its own time.
When night falls, follow that sequence according to the narrative, and do not cease to relieve it during the day and exercise gentle movement, and place it at night; and do this for several days until it is strengthened.
And do similarly there, if it is dislocated in the stomach area, and place it at that part and do the first operation there, until it is healed.
And similarly do there when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter xxx.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When complete dislocation occurs at one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure, because death catches up with the patient.
And it is said that the evacuation of the patient is beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and many weakened parts of their body, or two legs of theirs, or two arms of theirs, or one of those; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, because many weakened parts are displaced and many weakened parts make the removal of those to four parts.
Then that has been removed to the back parts and is called paraplegia.
The treatment of it is that then you should consider if the paraplegia occurs from weakness, because then there is no cure nor complete healing.
Moreover, in this case, they went through experimentation or percussion or similar methods, just as the Ancients did with various ways of treatment, which I will return to profit; however, I have already abbreviated from that which I have little excuse for, due to my proximity to the intention, with which I have exposed and formed diverse instruments, in order to show and expound on it.
And of those, there is no cure except for the one that occurs on the back itself, as I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their bed near a wall, and should be extended below with many pillows, so that the feet are not lifted.
And a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near the head of the patient, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bed.
And one minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and below the small linen bandages firmly; and extend the end of the linen to the stick which is above the head of the patient, and place it on them; and tie the other linen bandage around their thighs at the knees, and above their legs; and adjust all the linen bandages and place them on the other stick which is above their feet.
And the minister should carefully extend the linen to the part of the stick, and do not displace the two sticks and the linen bandages from their places where they are fixed, but rather hold them firmly as we have said.
And the doctor should place their palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns to its place, or should place them on a table, and adjust the patient's feet on the table until they return to their proper position.
Moreover, if it does not return to its place through this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air at three arms' distance, and hollow out a hole in the wall where we have said that the patient should be placed with their extremity on the table. And then place the flat surface of the table on the vertebrae, and the doctor should place their feet on the other extremity, and pull strongly until the vertebra is straightened and returns to its proper position.
And if you want, open what is twisted in the back; and it is that you should place on the ground above the head of the patient at the end of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and above their head at the end of the bed two sticks likewise; and let the length between each stick be a palm, and already it has been done in each stick where the cord turns, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a single stick rotating where the twist is, and let it be turned in the two tracks of the two sticks.
And at the extremity of it there is a track in which the stick is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is twisted; and in the two other sticks it is similar to that.
And then tighten the linen bandages that have been stretched on the feet of the patient in the track where it is above their head, and the linen bandages that have been stretched on their thighs in the twist where it is above their feet.
And then apply a certain turn and stay in a minister who turns the turn with his hand, and the doctor will bend the spine according to what we have said.
And then because the spine is returned, and the area is bent, then cover with a plaster made of albumen of egg, and stop; and place over the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gouty swelling, and above the division of the spine there.
And then it will be relaxed in the ligament which we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of nutrients until it is healthy.
And if there remains some impediment in the area at the end of the healing, then cover so that medicines are administered which mollify and loosen in administration on the table for long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a thin layer of lead.
And some fallen vertebrae are impeding the back of the spine of the back, and it is customary for that dislocation; and it is that bone which you have already mentioned so that no cover is made with that medicine, because very strong force will make you fall to death.
Chapter 21.
On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not come together except by dislocation only, and they do not impede there where they impede in other small joints with movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it to the inner parts is this, when you adjust the leg of the healthy side with the affected leg, it is then longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the affected leg cannot bend its knee towards the groin, and it is the place where the knee joint is apostematized by a postulate apostem, so that the head of the thigh bone has arrived here.
And the sign of that which impedes dislocation is to the outer parts, it is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that which impedes dislocation to the front parts is this: it expands the leg according to its natural measure, but meanwhile it does not bend that knee which has pain in the knee, and if you force it to walk and it cannot do so on the front parts; and its urine is retained and its knee joint is apostematized, and its ambulation is on the ankle.
And the sign of that which impedes dislocation to the back parts is this: it does not expand the knee, nor can it bend that knee which bends the joint, and its leg is shorter than the other, and its knee joint is mollified, and the head of the thigh bone is at that place.
Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been antiquated with what you have administered reduction to it and returned according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore it does not cover that there should be made a profound impression in that.
Moreover, in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you will be able to reduce it to its place, and extend it to the inner parts and to the outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because very strong force returns it and does not require another cure.
Moreover, if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the affected part below, or with its hands, or with the ligament which is relaxed over the leg below the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one upwards so that it reaches the affected parts below the knee joint; and then strengthen the ligament over the head of the thigh bone, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
And its extension is either from the inner part to the knee joint at the part of the hip, or from the back part to the part of the back.
And its extension is all those in a single direction until the affected part is elevated above the level of the ground and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we speak of in their own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner parts, it is necessary that the affected part be resupinated above the knee joint; and then pause the ligaments on the head of the thigh bone in that place where between the head of the thigh bone and the place below the knee joint; and then extend the ligament from the part of the knee joint to the outer part of the hip.
And another strong minister grasps their arms, and presses the large area of the patient's thigh and extends to the parts before to extend violently, because that returns to its usual place.
At this stage, it is necessary to apply a lighter cure, in which the member is reduced so that other species are not affected.
But if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance at this stage of cure, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient are bound together strongly, lightly, above the ankles and below the toes.
And let the length of each part be according to the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And let the patient be suspended over the head of the bed, and that it be in a massage; and let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
And let a strong youth command that he supports the head of the thigh, and be suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth supports the thigh in strong empowerment, so that the joint returns to its usual place with velocity.
But in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the part before, it is necessary that the patient lies on a soft seat according to what we have recommended in having gelbozitated; and let the ligament be strengthened over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
And let two stools be placed, one at their feet, and the other at the head; and let two adjusted stools be placed on the middle of the fixed bridge above which drips humidities are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged by the stool being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts below is not attracted.
And let each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the parts below, then it is necessary that the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on the bridge; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's loin, and also cuts with the other hand, and in this cutting pause, he extends to the parts below to the part of the ankle.
And if the dislocation is to the parts behind, then it is not necessary that the patient's leg be extended to the parts below, and it is elevated above the ground; but it is necessary that it be placed on a hard surface, thus as it is necessary for the healing if their ankle is dislocated to the parts before, according to what we have said about the setting of it on two ankles; and it is above its face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
And it is necessary that compression be administered on the table above the area where the joint swells.
Then, since the reduction is completed as it is necessary — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches out their usual leg and expands those excuses, then you know that the member has returned as it is necessary — and then you adjust both thighs and place them in a bandage and stretch out to an end so that the ankle is not hidden in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And let the ligament be loosened and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those joints in establishment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and replace it, and stretch it out according to its first structure, and let it be for three days.
And let that be loosened, and make that wait in ambulation about several days, until it is comforted.
Chapter xxxii.
On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated to the parts before, and to the parts behind, and to the parts below more than the parts behind; and to the parts above it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that it commands the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is to make the patient straight, thus that it extends its usual leg, if possible; bind the two thighs to the face of it, and place their foot between the two thighs; and let the ankle be bound with your two palms, and hold those between the two fingers above the ankle in strength, and another minister extends the usual foot until the ankle returns to its place.
It seems that the patient's thigh is what adheres to their hip, elevating it without effort.
Then apply a plaster to that and bind the thigh to the hip, and then tie those in a bandage for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's walking ability for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension in the ligaments which are involved in the cure of the preceding ankle narration.
Chapter 33.
On the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Some ankle joints are reduced by small reduction, and some are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made at the internal or external parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle becomes swollen preceding the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its reduction is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitated massage and kept in place until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to make the patient straight, and hold that one firmly and strongly with the back of their hand at the middle place of it.
And then you put your right hand to straighten the foot on the upper most part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left hand for two fingers, and then extend with the left hand; and push the foot's toes towards the hip, making the thigh struggle.
And make two finger movements according to what we have counted.
And then push the foot's toes towards the hip at the third finger, and you are at the ankle.
So if it returns in one finger or in two according to this manner, and if the foot is well-placed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on the floor, and stretch a bandage strongly on the ground, and place it between their thighs, and you have enveloped it around the drap so that the patient does not move.
And then the servant holds their thighs, and another servant extends the foot with their hands or with ligaments that lie on the neck of the foot; and then extend each servant against the extension of the seat, and the bandage is extended between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient does not move to the lower parts, away from its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns with facilitation.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and strongly extend that in the ligaments, and bind the foot with ligaments to the hip.
And it is necessary to take care or guard against the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on that does not become violent and holds it strongly.
And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend it.
And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is forgotten to go to that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not dissolve and corrupt, and then it does not receive cure.
And if you reach the postema wound, then it is necessary that you administer in the Cedacio of it, which our narration has preceded, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is reduced.
Chapter 34.
On the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be reduced with little extension and effort; and because it is not difficult, it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on a low bench or on a table, and be steady thus as if one were going.
And then you stand on feet, and pause the foot on what is minimal of the joints, and then calcify that in the foot until it returns, and you see that already reduced and does not appear at the eminent place.
And then pause below the belly of the foot on a table that takes all the foot, which has two caps, and then strengthen that in structure decently and firmly for three days; and then remove it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the species of dislocation that are caused by a blow or a fracture or some other accidents.
When you encounter any of these causes, and you persevere in the cure of it and in the restoration of health, many rapid successes will avert death.
And for that reason no one should presume to cure it, unless he is skilled in the art, with long experience, merciful and pitiful, slow, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that calm the inflamed parts, and alleviates the patient's divine judgment, hoping for salvation from destruction, and for the alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope. And then it is necessary to remove as much as possible from the commencement of the cause, so that the inflamed part does not become worse.
And then if the limb returns to its natural state, then administer a regimen that calms the inflamed part and cures the wound with what is convenient for the limb, according to the dictates of the learned authorities.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and you encounter separated bones, then you perform the reduction of them, and do in this case what we have said about simple dislocations that occur in those places.
And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument of terror in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my preaching; for it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy to your body, which truly exists in your time. Thus end the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly filled with those which God may bless. Amen.
