Oh children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last part of the science of medicine, because it has been concluded by its own result, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, it seems to me that you will be able to grasp that which belongs to you in this treatise, which is divided from my operation, namely surgery.
For my operation is abolished in our region and at our time, entirely private, except that little light remains of it, and the remnants of it are left; and there remain no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been modified by most errors and misunderstandings, until the intentions of it are sealed and its force and art are lengthened.
And it seems to me that you will revitalize that same order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may be familiar with the forms of the cauterizing instruments and other tools of the craft, as is necessary for addition to the declaration, and preparation for the work, which cause is necessary.
But the reason why no good craftsman can be found in our time who has his own hand is because the art of medicine is long-winded, and it requires its own practitioner to have been exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew, so that he could know the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and having knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and the arrangement of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they are inserted.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name is not much, but in the small work, and most of all in the art of surgery.
But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy, will not be freed from error by which men will die, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and fall short of its science and experience.
For you saw a foolish doctor and ignorant cut open the esophagus of a woman, and cut through some arteries of the neck, so that a great deal of blood flowed until the woman died between her hands.
And I saw another doctor who insisted that he pull out an abscess from a man's body which had progressed in his condition, and the abscess was large, and it came to him and tore open that abscess with a piece of the intestines, so that that man died three days later.
And you had already been asked to pull it out, and I saw that due to the size of the abscess and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from a duke in our land for surgery, and he applied himself to a blacksmith's apprentice who had a fracture on his thigh; and the doctor, with his ignorance, pulled out the fracture, above the wound, with pulleys and astals with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And the doctor untied it according to his desires, and then he re-wound it, and then he left it for some days and ordered that we should not loosen the bandage; and so it was that the thigh and leg became gangrenous, and ultimately led to perdition.
And you were called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and consequently he found relief and began to forget his pains.
But meanwhile corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to corrupt the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and had it ulcerated about three days later, so that the magnitude of his evil was revealed to him by the lord of him.
Which is because the cancerous boil is pure of melancholic humor, whereas it is not necessary that it should spread to him entirely, but rather be in a member which suffers as if it were being hosted by it.
And therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be divided into two parts: one is the operation which is associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is peril in the major dispositions.
And you have already existed here in every place of this book where the operation is in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that the foolish ones do not take away the way to speak and to disown you.
And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way with the grace of God to obtain salvation and noble succession, and avoid the terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and keep your arms at bay from this which makes you afraid, so that your situation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more remaining for your glory, and then again in the world and finally in your sanctity.
Galen already said in some of his own sayings: "Do not heal bad illnesses, lest you become a bad doctor."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and the first part is on... The first chapter ordered from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and ironwork of cauterizers, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on incision and puncture, and on cupping, wounds, and extraction of splinters and similar matters, all organized and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and re-location, and on curing of torticollis and similar matters; a chapter organized from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
You should know the quality of the joints of that cauterizer and its inconveniences, and in what condition it is prohibited to cauterize.
Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the joints of the cauterizer and its inconveniences is a long and prolix sermon, subtle by science, and secret and hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are in disagreement among themselves, and I myself am afraid to prolong the sermons of theirs.
And therefore I say that cauterization is contrary to the entire universal complexion which is in matter or its materials, except for two complexions which are caudal with respect to their materials.
In the dry and scorching complexion with respect to material, it will desiccate; for some people say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a scorching and dry disease with water that is hot and dry should be healed.
And he who says the opposite, that through cauterization the joints are made healthy in all scorching and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moistures to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say by the sermon of that, that experiment is this too already known to me several times to discover.
But I do not think that it is necessary to bring this forward again, as it has already been explained and exercised in the chapter on cauterization, and to understand the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in their respective bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time for those.
But in other complexions, it is not for you to be afraid, and most especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these, and there is no disagreement among them about the joints being cauterized in those.
And understand, children, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and its goodness, it is clear that those who burn with medicine are contrary to cauterization with fire, for the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is being cauterized and does not harm another member adjusted to it except with a small injury.
But the action of medicine that is contrary to cauterization reaches those members which are distant from it, and very easily brings disease into a member with difficult healing and very easily leads to pus.
But the fire, because of its sublimity and good substance, does nothing but superfluous things. And it is already known to us through experiment and long duration of service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that it is not read at a better free time in this pause to you, a secret hidden by fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion by which it drives out diseases, with a philosophical demonstration sermon, which would be keenly felt in your souls.
And understand, children, that the time of year is not harmonious for making a cauterization and the best time of early spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, because the harm caused by the accidental timing is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cauterization, and most especially if it is for necessary pains or painful necessities, which do not tolerate delay because they are feared by those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through the timing.
And thus it is not considered in your souls, or, children, this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is healed by cauterization, it is not reduced at all times, and pause is made after that consequence.
And the cause is not thus as they say because of this, for cauterization is nothing but in a place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors that are the cause why pains come.
But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous over medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its disease will return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it by the accumulation of superfluities there, and what is brought forth in its acquisition through food and similar causes; but if the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humors, just as cauterization for toothache and similar pains, it is possible that in that case the pain will not return, but rather it will be reduced to smallness.
And in addition, the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is a despairing word, not because I understand what they mean by it, for I think it is not healing that profits through medicine or any other cause approaching cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine only when we administer the methods of healing in certain diseases, and those medicines do not conduce, and approaching the end of the cause, one administers cauterization, and it profits at that. And from here on I want to make it clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which is different from that of the common people and foolish doctors.
And they said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a difference, as long as it is absolutely true, because you have already proved and experimented that it does not matter in some bodies except for others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron just as they say; but on the other hand when you do cauterization with fire using gold, it is not to be declared, because it is hidden according to the quantity you want by the roughness of the gold, and how it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust the ignition above it so that the gold melts in the fire, and case some plates are formed from which the artist can observe through the occupation of that.
And therefore it is made necessary to do cauterization with iron, for us to proceed more lightly and more properly towards the rectitude of operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have arranged those from head to foot, so that the one demanding it may easily find what they want in it.
The First Chapter.
This cauterization brings relief to the humidity and coldness above the severest accident of which there are two causes, namely the cause of soda and the multitude of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the partitions of the eyes and ears, fluent, and the multitude of sleepiness, and toothaches and the gout, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, just as paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar diseases in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this: first, I command the patient to be purged with lactative medicine in the head, clarifying it, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the patient and their age and habit demands.
And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and after that, to make a circle between his temples on a well-crafted bench, and to place his hands on the pie-shaped pieces.
And then I command him to pause the razor's stroke at the edge of his palm, right above the nose between his eyes. But when the said place is reached, mark that place with a tent, and then ignite the olive cauterization of which this is the form:
And then pause that cauterization on the marked place with a tent, in a way that it descends, as your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
And then raise your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see even a small amount of bone being uncovered, such as the size of a grain of error, immediately lift your hand, and if not, return your hand with that iron, or another like it, until what I have told you is seen by the bone.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it sit for three days.
And then pause above that spot, surrounded by border and let it sit on top until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with gentle quadriform medicine until it is healed.
And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it gets, because it is better and more healing.
And some of them said that the cuneiform should be cauterized into the bone, and the cauterization should be kept until some part of the specificity of the bone is consumed.
And then that which has been adjusted to the bone will be removed, and then it will be cured.
And others said that with the cauterization, it will come to the end, and then it will press into the bone a strong impression until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alpha. And they think that from that place, the vapors of the head will evaporate.
And the open wound should be kept for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But I do not see these two species of cauterization in general, but only in certain men according to the way of fear; and leaving that aside, as you should know, it is better for health when it is so; because the head is revealed by solution of continuity like we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frivolous nature.
And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better for me; and from that house and with that work, I have health.
Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Head.
When in the entire head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs and this is prolonged in the patient's suffering, and they use remedies such as warships, comb-like things, poultices, plasters, wads, cauls, and gualinas, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cauterization which relieves but does not benefit at all from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in their nature; and if it is not frivolous and finds a great cold, then that cauterizes another cauterization, leaving it for a little while. And then cauterize that on the crown of the patient's head with a cauterization until the cuneiform is divided. Cut the cuneiform and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cauterization in the posterior part of the head in the location called "vas" - and it is that location where the wind pipe is paused. And lift up your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will experience great and diverse pain unlike any other pains from all the other cauterizations of the head.
And you will say this cauterization in its place, because it is necessary that the cauterization with which we cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Migraine Non-Antique.
When it is necessary to evacuate the head clarifying medicine, and another cure is administered as I have said in the descriptions of diseases; and if none of these benefit, then cauterization takes place in two ways: either with acute medicine that is contrary, or with iron.
But the cauterization with medicine that is contrary is when you take a lump of aloes, and scrape it off, and cut off the extremities of both ends. And then incise the location of the pain on the temple with a sharp lancet, until it makes a spot below the cuneiform, so that it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to it with a stopper, so that the constriction descends gradually, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the alum and treat the wound for two or three days, and then pause above it surrounded by border until the spot becomes hard.
And then cure that with gentle quadriform medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some contrary medicines which I have written in the two treatises on contrary medicines.
But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite by cauterization of which this is the form:
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
And then pause above the spot of pain, and keep your hand - so that the archery which is left behind is not consumed - and rotate the small iron piece by piece with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is consumed by the specificity of the cuneiform is as much as half of it, and lift up your hand to prevent the artery from being consumed which is left behind, in order that no flow of blood may come.
And then pour the spot with saltwater and pause it above the location, and leave it for three days; and then pause the spot with a border, and cure it with gentle quadriform medicine until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the edge of the cimeter according to the cauterization, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-antique migraine.
Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Ancient Migraine.
When you cure migraine with what we have said about the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not benefit, and sometimes by the disease it is not enough to apply what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary that you ignite the cimeter cauterization until it is albified, since you indicate above the spot of pain with a line of length which is most of the digit or whatever; and place your hand for one moment and strengthen it so that the artery is incised and penetrates into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the mandible's continuity, which is affected by mastication, and that the lacert is not consumed and the nerves which are related to it are not damaged, and that there is no spasmodic spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially at that which ignores what it does and is not studied or practiced; and leave the operation in place at the beginning.
And you will find it as a reminder of the regulation of blood flow by accident of the artery according to its own manner, in your own location of this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cauterization and you see the patient's body is tolerant, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization which we have said in the chapter on strengthening of artery with two cauterizations, and it is better cauterization this one and more conformable.
Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Earaches.
When in the earache there is pain due to cold and it is cured by lacrosse causes and another cure which I have said in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then ignite the cauterization point, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
And then pierce the puncta and ignite it, and bring it around the entire ear as a wheel is revolved, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in each one. Along with the cauterization, go slowly and gradually with the razor of the ear, as you have marked the location with a tent.
And if the cauterization of all those points in the entire ear is done, and whichever one you want, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Torture.
Torture which is cured and with cauterization is not but of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that develops due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torture with herbs and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and your cure does not conduce, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first is a little bit of the razor of the ear, the second is a small spot on the temple, and the third is the conjunction of two lips.
And pause your cauterization at the opposite side of the unhealthy part, for softening only appears on the part that seems to be healing.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterizer at the right extremity of the ear, a little bit above the crown of the head, and on the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's tip, and place your hand with the cauterizer until the quantity of the majority of the specificity of the cuneiform is consumed.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is a species of the cimeter, the form of which is before us. But however subtle it may be, you should see that a little bit of it is so; and it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh a little bit.
And then cure the location with what we have said before, until it is healed.
Seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with what we have said and your medication does not conduce, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauterizations: on all the horns of his head; and with a cauterization in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with a cauterization in the nape. And the manner of the cauterization is made according to what has been said above.
And it is already cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is even later; and then be cured with what proceeds.
Eighth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Oblivion caused by Flux.
It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large herbs and pills that serve as a clarifying medicine.
And then take off the patient's head and pause on the back of the neck an ointment as described in the treatise on ointments.
And pause that for several times, because it is a manner of cauterization. And do so according to the method which I have already said.
And therefore if by those it is well healed; and otherwise, then do so to the three cauterizations in the posterior part of his head, which are descendants of the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cauterization the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cauterization with what has proceeded.
But if you wish to add more and the patient is so tolerant, then do so to the middle part; and if you wish even greater addition, then immediately cauterize that on both horns.
And then cure it until it is healed; and be the cauterization olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Paresis and Softening of the Entire Body.
It is necessary for you to process in softening of the head with herbs and with what we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize that with three cauterizations: one in the middle part of the head, one on all the horns of the head, and one on the posterior part of the neck, and three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for many and tolerating patients, and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with cauterization until it is consumed by the cuneiform of the back, and lift up your hand. And then cure it until it is healed, and this be olive-shaped cauterization.
Tenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No, the epilepsy is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
And therefore it is necessary to clarify the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient's disease is great and is tolerant, except for medicines.
And if the child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarismes and mastiguateurs which serve as clarifying medicine, before that for several days, with good nutrition.
And then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize that with one cauterization in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another cauterization on the back of the neck, and cauterize each horn of the head. And if the patient is strong and tolerating, then cauterize that with the cauterizations which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And be olive-shaped according to what has preceded.
But if the patient is an infant, then pause subtle cauterization according to this manner.
Eleventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are moist and corrupted and flux is gross, then cauterize that with the cauterizations which we have said in having paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink that which clarifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
And then take off the patient's head, and then do a torture decently done to him on the circle, and then pause that in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should be seated comfortably, and held from all sides.
And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of ancient border of sheep's wool. And warm that over the fire with a tempered heat by measure, which the patient suffers when it is in him. And then place that in the middle part of the head on the circle, and leave it until it is heated up.
And do so with the patient in one week's time, with another regimen of it good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to what is most suitable for him, unless you hold your hand with a cauterizer thus ordered: this is a species of cauterization which moistens the brain with equality.
And then pause that in a cloth wrapped around it in linen or gray wool.
Twelfth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Water Descending into the Vein.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the vein by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which clarifies the head of him, and guard against all moisture.
And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauterizations on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or from one side if it is the beginning of water in one vein.
Cut with a cauterizer all the veins and arteries that are below the cuneiform; and be the cauterizations in that length on the latitude of the temples.
And beware of blood flux when it is cauterized; and if you see any blood flux from him, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the excision of those and caution against blood flux.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the vertebral bone below two bones with two cauterizations produced gradually.
Thirteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the outside of the head and it is verified that this is superfluous frozen flux, then cauterize that with a cauterizer which we have recounted in the chapter on beginning of water flowing into the veins, and with a cauterization in the middle part of the head and two cauterizations in the vertebral bone below two temples, and with two cauterizations in the vertebral bone below two bones. And if you need to add more, then cauterize that on the entire length of the cuneiform bone over the extremity of the forehead with a small cauterizer.
Fourteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Foul Smell from the Nose.
When you treat him with the water which we have said in the division and your treatment does not produce the desired effect, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient those concoctions for three nights; and then take off his head, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cauterizer and an olive-shaped cauterizer. And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cauterizer and two cauterizations on both foreheads below the hair, a little bit.
And beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And with the clove-shaped cauterizer, this is the form.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Softening of Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cauterizer having this lunar-shaped cauterization; and this is its form:
And if you wish, cauterize that on both foreheads a little bit with two cauterizations all around, and be extended from the temples. And be the length of each cauterization according to the quantity of the forehead.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is absorbed.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Eye when the hairs are converted to the inner parts and push the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are converted to the inner parts thus that push the eye, cauterize them in those places according to two manners, either by fire or by medicine which is concomitant.
If with cauterization of fire, command the patient before that he looks at his hairs thus as those which clarify them, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if push that you should not let it be, then stretch the eyes of him with a bandage so that no harm comes to them until the hairs are born.
Then when they are born and equalized, pause the patient's head in your seat, and then seal over the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of mercury, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of hen or in mucilage of papyrus over the eye.
And then ignite the cauterizer, whose form is this:
And then cauterize on the figure which has been sealed, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the cuneiform bone which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, appears properly.
And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of him raised above the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped around it until the scar is elevated. And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns to the hairs and the eyelid is softened again, then do another time the cauterization on that just as you did originally.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized so that the hairs do not push into the eye.
But the cauterizer with concomitant medicine is this: you command the patient to look at his hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a chart on cloth in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take from known salt and living cause one ounce. The end! And then what is here, and mix those causes well, and make this with a festival so that it is not heated up; and then spread that water on the chart which is made like the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that over one eye or both eyes; and pause below the eyelid wrapped in albumen of hen, and the patient's head be in your seat.
And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little bit, but do not harm it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for sting is in him like fire.
And then when you see that he has received the sting, pause and let the medicine be as it is; therefore when the stinging ceases, rinse the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted thus as it has been washed away by fire or incision, for it is well; and if not, return to that place of the medicine where you have not yet applied it and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped around it until the scar of adjustment is eradicated; and then cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to be vigilant and diligent in your operation so that the medicine does not fall into the eye; and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and some cause of the hairs pushes into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that location where the eyelid is softened, and do just as you did at the beginning, and apply it to that place until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to greatness and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
And let not the way of rectitude be hidden from him who studies in this art.
Seventeenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Lachrymal of the Eye.
When you cure fistula with the water which we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize that according to this manner: command the patient to pause his head on the seat, and hold the head of him by some minister between the seats in such a way that he is not harmed or agitated with his own head.
And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of hen or in mucilage of papyrus over the eye of him.
And then ignite the cauterizer, whose form is this:
the shape of which is a crescent, like the form of a cane or a pen nib of a vulture, from one extremity to which the cauterizer has been made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you wish, let it come out like a tent.
But meanwhile that which is concave is better for the operation.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the pus from it.
And then pause with the cauterizer which is well ignited, and take a little bit of that to the corner of the eye at the edge of the nose, so that your hand or the patient may not be disturbed; and then pause the cauterizer on the gray of the eye and corrupt that.
And then if at the beginning of your cauterizer you see it go into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterizer once or twice as needed; and leave that so for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped around it and surrounding it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
But if it has passed 11 days and is not healed, then pause with the sharp corrosive medicine so that the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in your own chapter.
And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier doctors said: take the place of the fistula and fill it with a sharp corrosive medicine, and then pause in that fissure so subtle that its shape is this: Pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and take your hand with a small spatula having good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed because the melted lead will reach the eye of him; and it is necessary to pause over the eye of the patient wrapped in albumen of hen or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and cures that by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the water which we have said for cauterization and cure, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to make a cut of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its own place.
Eighteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Wounds of the Pots.
Many times accidental fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the water which we have said in the divisions and your cure does not take effect, then ignite the small cauterizer like a cutlery according to this shape that is shown:
And be the concavity of it according to the subtlety of a cutlery.
And then pause that initial application cautiously in those fissures until the cauterizer reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Nineteenth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an abscess forms and bursts, and then is softened, and then is corrupted, and a fistula forms, and then you cure that and your cure does not take effect, it is necessary to ignite the cauterizer according to the quantity received in the fistula; and then put that ignited cauterizer into the track of the fistula, and take your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it make it thus once or twice; and then cure that with the water which we have said for curing until it is healed.
And then if the pus is extracted and healed, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own chapter.
Twentieth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines and do not confirm, then pause the patient's head on the seat, and ignite the cauterizer in the form which will come thus, so that you pause the quill over the tooth and insert into that the ignited cauterizer hastefully, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should fill his mouth with water of salt and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop that, because the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Twenty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or in it is cold or warm, and your cure with medicine does not take effect, then cauterize that in two manners: either by border of cows, or by fire.
Cauteri by border is that you take the border of cows and boil it in a cow's hide, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and immerse that in boiling border, and pause that over the painful tooth hastily until it is cooled.
And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the border as said above, and pause that over the painful tooth, and pause on top of it with hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the concavity of the tooth.
But meanwhile the cauterization by fire is that you attend to the quill of iron or steel, and it should be in the core of it some graveness, and the sharpness of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape which will come, and pause that over the tooth and take your hand until the cauterizer is cooled; and do this several times because the pain has been alleviated or on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that by the impression of that cauterizer, the patient fills his mouth with good border and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cauterizer.
And cauterize as you wish, with what you can do at your best.
And this is the form of the quill:
Twenty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Extrophuli.
When extrophuli are covered with phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you wish to promote digestion of those slightly, then ignite the cauterizer in a concave shape as follows, having two extremities curved so that the smoke of the cauterizer rises from the other extremity, and pause that ignited cauterizer over that abscess once or twice, or as many times as is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days and pause over it wrapped in a cloth until what the fire has burned out is alleviated.
And then cure that with an ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
Twenty-Third Chapter.
On Cauterization of Nodes on the Voice and Constriction of Ale.
When the humors come up to the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by coldness of congestion, it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that in the root of the throat in the depressed location.
And beware that you do not bring the cauterizer to the glottis nor burn a large part of it, but only a small portion.
And then cauterize that with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it. And the cauterizer should be shaped like a claw, as previously described.
And then cure that with water as previously described until it is healed.
Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Disease of the Lung and Cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are caused by cold humors and the patient has no fever or sweating, and is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the furcula in the depressed locations of the lungs; and another cauterizer in the middle location of the ribcage between two mamillae; and let the cauterizer be shaped like a claw according to the previous description.
And if you wish, make the cauterization punctate with the cauterizer that is called a puncture, the shape of which was previously described in the punctation of earache.
And make holes into those places; and then cure that with water as previously described until it is healed.
And now the cauterizers have three curves where cauterization is done on that: in one stroke you can do three cauterizations according to this form:
Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Titillic, which is the head of the aid.
When the head of the aid is displaced due to lubricating humors and it is not fixed in its return journey, and thus the displacement is caused by a small movement such as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the displacement first, and then reverse the patient's position onto his back or onto one side; and then lift the bone which is located at the back of the citillic towards the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is displaced backwards.
And then ignite the cauterizer having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the bone until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will come to be that of four heads of cauterizers.
And several times it is adjusted according to this count, and for which are the cauterizers 8.
And then pause over the cauterizer with pores filled with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be hurt for some time until it is comforted.
And if the displacement is to the upper parts and there it is made so, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cauterizer or with punctate cauterizers, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and many humors come into the stomach to such an extent that the contents of its congestion are multiplied and are increased, and if you continue with the methods of curing and do not confirm, then it is necessary to place the patient on his back, and stretch out his arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauterizers: one cauterizer leaving the ribs for the quantity of a finger shaped like a claw, and two cauterizers leaving from both sides of the cauterizer, until the figure of triangular cauterization is reached; and lengthen between them so that they are not adjusted to make a precipice.
And if the depth of the cauterizer is equal to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the bone.
And let the figure of the cauterizer be according to this form, with addition; and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cauterizer according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctated with that which is frightened by this cauterizer: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity you wish with a tent, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Fettered Foot.
When pain comes to the foot due to coldness or moisture or great swelling, and it is caused by excessive egression from its normal state, and the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not confirm, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back on a pillow three times according to this form and this quantity, so that the cauterizers are applied to the foot leaving the iliac bones, where the human decubitus takes place.
And let the space be between each cauterizer according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizers be according to the length of the straight arm.
And do not compress your foot with the cauterizer force.
And if the quantity of water used is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the bone, and not more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then let him sit, with his legs stretched out, and raise his arms.
And if you are able to cauterize those cauterizers with a cauterizer like a dagger, when it is according to your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the bone be adjusted so that it is adjusted to the whole body and reaches into the vessels, for this bone is subtle here; and know this.
Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On Perforation of Abscess of the Foot with a Cauterizer.
When you have an abscess or swelling on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience great weight and pain with no sharpness.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then with great pain and sharpness that sometimes fatigues even the doctors with its cure.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto his back on a pillow; and then sense the location of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cauterizer which is similar to a rag, the shape of which was previously described on another page. And then cauterize with that cauterizer until all the bone is consumed, until it reaches the pulp, until a healthy pus is formed.
And then cure that with the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterizer unless you are well-versed in the art of medicine and have studied many diseases; but this one may be tried occasionally with boldness on this operation, but nonetheless leave that which I have written, and it is better.
Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Piles.
The ancient cauterizers of the roots of aristology said that piles are made to be treated in this way: take a long, dry root of aristology, a pointed one that is found, and it is of the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse it in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cauterizer in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauterizers as guides, one slightly inclining towards the side below the beard, and with two cauterizers on either side of the fifth rib, inclining slightly to the back parts; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the foot; and with another above the stomach, and with three cauterizers at the back parts; and with one cauterizer in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauterizers on either side of the foot, leaving the cauterizer which is between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cauterizer, but rather be in the manifestation of the bone in work.
And some ancient ones said that some men are such that they use a cauterizer of iron like a ray and ignite it, and place it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess and purges out pus, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
But in this perforation with a cauterizer there is no fear, for they die soon after it happens in the location of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Thirty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization of Melancholy.
When you cure the disease of melancholy with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then make a cauterizer in that location according to three ways, all of which are right-sided, of which one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melancholy according to the figure of the cauterizers of the foot, the figure of which was previously described.
And let the thickness between each cauterizer be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cauterizer be the method which we have said in the cauterizers of the foot equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cauterizer; and let the patient be lying on his back.
And it is another method of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauterizer having two handles, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the bone which is at the end of the melancholy where the patient's left side lies.
And let your elevation be that which you raise the bone according to the length of the body, so that they may make cauterizers according to the latitude of the body.
And then insert the two handles, ignite one, into that which is on the other side of the bone.
And then extract the cauterizer; and thus make four cauterizers.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cauterizer having three handles.
And then cure the cauterizer more thoroughly than you would leave it to gather dust for many days, because it is more certain that other causes precede in the cure.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Hydrophobia.
Cauteries are not cut in hydrophobia, but rather in a specific and proper manner.
When you cure the hydrophobic with the methods of cure which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with four cauterizers around the umbilicus, one on the stomach, one on the foot, one on the melancholy, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterizer be proportioned to the subtlety of the bone.
And then leave the cauterizer untouched for as long as possible, so that it may gather dust and not be used again.
And do not evacuate the patient of cure near the cauterizer with water as is necessary for two purposes, and thus hasten to it with the aid of healing.
The shape of the cauterizer with which the stomach is cauterized is claw-shaped, according to the form that precedes it, and it is this one with which the back is cauterized, olive-shaped, according to its preceding form.
Thirty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of Pains and Limbs.
When the pains are abscessed in hydrophobic and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary that you cauterize the pains on the back of the knee in a cauterizer that is between the auricular and anular, and raise your hand with the cauterizer and do not turn it; and then raise your hand and do not return to it, for the stagnant water resists.
It is the cauterizer according to this form: And then make two cauterizers on both limbs, and in each limb make a cauterizer at the extremity of the cauterizer like a claw. And let the cauterizers be according to the length of the limb: one at the top and the other at the middle location of the limb; and on each limb, two cauterizers.
And leave the wound open without cure for a long time, so that some water may flow out of it.
And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Thirty-Third Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Belly.
When the belly is afflicted with heat and moisture to the extent that it weakens the virtues, namely the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is not cured with the methods of cure we have said and does not confirm, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization of virtue appearing, then cauterize him with a great cauterizer on his stomach according to what precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterizer of the circle and four small cauterizers in the circuit of the umbilicus, with a claw-shaped cauterizer; or two cauterizers.
And if sometimes the excess of moisture appears and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize him on the navel and intestines, and firmly adjust two cauterizers over the stomach and near the groin, for it is perfect cure of which you will not err.
Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of the gross humors is inflamed or corrupted with moisture, and they are not cured with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then cauterize him with three cauterizers above the left and right triangular bones of the small back, and with a cauterizer above the navel which falls on both sides.
And if you observe that the stomach of him is inflamed and his food is not digested, and his face is often abscessed, then cauterize him on the stomach with a great cauterizer according to what precedes; and one cauterizer on the foot, and another cauterizer on his melancholy with a claw-shaped cauterizer; and leave the cauterizer untouched for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Athletes near the Absence of Their Own.
When you abscess athletes, then ignite the cauterizer that is similar to a ray. And then insert that ignited cauterizer into the abscessed athlete, and finally apply your hand until the cauterizer reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
And make so one or two, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and finally cure those with water that confirms their wounds until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a great cauterizer on someone, it is more certain in judgment.
Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterization of Fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its location, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cauterizer.
Therefore when someone has a fistula in the natural opening, and it is old, filled with stagnant blood and corrupted moisture, and therefore what is most fitting is that you probe that one with a subtle attempt, and then know the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
And then ignite the cauterizer that is similar to a ray. And then insert that ignited cauterizer into this fistula, and according to the quantity of the depth which the probe has reached.
And then iterate over that one with the cauterizer until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one, two or three times, according to your necessity.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not make a cauterization unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you are certain that it is not penetrating.
And then cure that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and all matter has been abscessed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
And if the matter is not removed from there, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting, or falling into those causes of which a reminder will be found in its location.
Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On Cauterization of Tonsils.
When in the tonsils there is pain from inflammation or excessive ventosity, and because of this the patient's throat is pained, then it is necessary that you cauterize each tonsil with a claw-shaped cauterizer of which the description precedes.
And then cauterize again with a small one, so that three linear cauterizers will appear, and therefore they will be more certain in judgment.
Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Bladder.
When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize him on the most distant part of the bladder, where the hairs of the navel begin, and cauterize with one cauterizer on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cauterizer be according to the quantity of the nails on the foot; and cauterize him with a cauterizer in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauterizers if necessary.
And let it be a claw-shaped cauterizer according to what has been processed.
Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Arm.
When there is inflammation and moisture in the arm, and because of this it is prohibited to make an incision, and the menstruation of that person is corrupted, and it is delayed in its provocation, and accidents occur causing pain in the movement of their arms, then it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauterizers in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterizer on the most distant part of the back, or with two cauterizers, and let it be a claw-shaped cauterizer.
Fortieth Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Hip.
When moisture is poured into the part of the hip, and certain causes of swelling occur in that location, and a sign of it is that the limb is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is located in the way it has been described above.
Then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cauterizer similar to a ring, as you have sensed with the probe in the circuit of that part, and because the part falls in the middle location of the circle.
And let it be the cauterizer of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cauterizer is not available to you, then cauterize with three cauterizers and one large olive-shaped cauterizer.
And let the cauterizer be made according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the bone; and then cure that one until it is healed.
Forty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Sciatic Nerve.
When pain occurs in the part of the hip, and its cause is inflammation and moisture, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not confirm, and it is old, then it is necessary that you cleanse the patient's gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize him.
And the method of the cauterizer in that is according to two methods: either a cauterizer with burning medicines or a cauterizer by fire.
It is according to two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize him on the part of the hip with three triangular cauterizers in this shape; and make a good depth in them. And let the space between each cauterizer be the quantity of the thickness of the said digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cauterizer.
Sometimes there may be a cauterizer on the middle location above the head of the hip, for there are four cauterizers.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, and let it be a continent and burning circle that consumes the subtlety of all the bone.
And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and does not spread into the joint.
But if it spreads into the joint, then you should cauterize him with two cauterizers on the joint above the location where the patient feels the pain; and one cauterizer on the femur for about four inches a little bit away from the pubic area.
And if the cauterizer is knife-shaped, and let the depth of the cauterizer be according to the quantity of the subtlety of the bone.
And if the patient says that the pain is spreading into the location near the bone of the feet, then you should cauterize him there where it hurts with a cauterizer for three to four points or more if needed.
And if the patient says that the pain is below the kneecap and into the joint, then you should cauterize him there with a knife-shaped cauterizer.
And be careful in all cauterization that you do not leave the cauterizer on for too long, so as not to burn nerves or large arteries, and because of this it may harm your patient or cause contractions.
And you have already seen one and another of those which I would cauterize on the femur and finally in the cauterization, and the leg becomes inflamed with fire until the tumor reaches the foot, and the fire is perforated and corrupted all the foot. And then comes forth a strong solution of the belly, and therefore death ensues.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise men say that in the cauterization of the hip, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, whose circumference is one-quarter of a palm; and be careful with your opening according to the thickness of a walnut or slightly less.
And inside that circle is another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the nails on the foot; and let those circles be two parts; and let their length be one nail or two nails, and make in them a border of iron decently adorned with the circles; and this is the form of it:
And then be ignited in the fire until it reddens and gives sparks, and then be placed on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side. And thus cauterize him with three circular cauterizers in one motion.
And then leave him for three days; then apply an ointment to the wound and let it remain open for many days; and then cure him with remedies until he is healed.
Thus says Albucasis: "Oh, sons, of this type of cauterization we have used little, due to the fear of looking at it, and therefore few have found those who look upon it."
But from good cauterizers that suffered there, and finding the location of it.
But cauterizers with burning medicines are those that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which the guaffo of the iron door is seen; let the length of the partitions be in the height of theirs be two nails or as many.
And if the space between them is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then pause over the part of the hip the patient lying on their side, and press your hand against the part of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually, and hold that for an hour, and apply the mordicatio and adjustment to him  as if from fire  until the mordicatio ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the hip with warm water.
And then leave him for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjustment is removed, and leave him thus for some days, and he will recover his strength; this is the final stage.
And then cure him with remedies until he is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the joint or leg, make him stand in water according to how it is done on the hip equally.
And this is the method of cold water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and unextinguished cause, one part in each side, and mix them together and pause in a new wave of which the left part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
And pause then the bottom of the wave in another wave enveloped, and place above it alkali and living cause with warm water that absorbs them by one finger, and then press them with your own hand for good compression, and leave the hole to descend from the sharp water into the left part of the enveloping wave.
And then adjust all that water, and place it above another living cause and new alkali renewed, because that which is done with great force of acuity will be administered in many operations of medicine and cauterization of other members, where the operation is done by fire.
And some of these medicines with which the hip is cauterized, such as mezquit and manna crataegi, and living cause mixed with saba in such a way that they are blended together.
And Gualia recounted the story of a man from antiquity who was operated on and cured with an operation that relieved pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and magnificently emphasized how wonderful it was to see him, saying that he did not need any further treatment, and that he was healed in just one moment like this, because he had already taken a bath and eaten food from that very thing.
And thus it is that one must take a certain kind of vertebrae, and if not found, then take a recent fig tree; and mix it with a little bit of gray matter and place it on the hip where there is pain, or in the joint, or in the leg, and bind it.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient shows relaxation of the adjustment.
And then place it in water and thus when the body is relaxed, immerse it in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines unless there is an evacuation of the body.
But already Escorides says that when a goat's wound is cauterized on the sciatic vein, it will soon benefit him; and let the cauterizer be taken with him according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And then take dry goat's flesh and infuse it with fire until it becomes carbonized; and then place it on the wool and leave it inside until it is stretched. And then iterate this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the biting reaches into the hip and relieves the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called "cauterio de vaquas".
Chapter XLII.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two.
Sometimes pain is in the two due to many causes, such as by fracture or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes through infusion of moist and humid matter.
And the cauterizer is not applied except in this single species which is made by effusion of moist matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with fetid pills and similar ones that are made on the two in which there is pain three lines according to its latitude, plus a sign or more in each line, depending on the quantity that appears from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And let there be cauterization with pointed cauterizers.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizers with a middle clavish shape according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Giltiness.
Many times this illness befalls small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their stature, causing elevation and movement in the alleys.
And it is found in the last vertebra of the back and the nails of the body that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize him with a circular cauterizer according to this form: that takes the cauterizer on all sides of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cauterizer two or three lines. And let there be proper points between them.
And then cure the place until it is healed with the water that we have said.
But beware, for cauterization should not be administered in a giltiness caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pains are caused by hot humors that envelop each member of the body, then when pains come to the feet, it is customary for doctors to properly call this condition "podagra".
And therefore, when gout caused by hot humors is cured by the method of cure and the pains are not relapsed, then the relapses are cut with cauterizers.
And that you cauterize him by evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauterizers.
And let there be an olive-shaped cauterizer, whose form is this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the skin of the foot, then make them with a pointed cauterizer. And if the pains rise into the joints or to other joints, and many times they are endued with it, then cauterize him on each joint with three or four cauterizers of all sides with this olive-shaped cauterizer.
And if many cauterizers are needed to perform this operation, then cauterize him and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, so that it is only as much as the thickness of a bone.
And if the pains rise into the joint and the back, then administer the cauterizer which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the most part and it is called sugar, then point in the circle of the nails as they turn, point in those two lines.
And if there remains pain in the said places, then point in the circle of the nails on each nail and on the tip of the finger.
And if the pains rise close to some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on all sides of the aid.
And do not evacuate the patient without good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is made by this cauterizer, then he will be healed, God help.
Chapter XLV.
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
When a wound occurs in the groin and says that it is open in front of the belly button, and this is how it begins to approach, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to leave off his food on that day and to use gentle causes so that the wound heals from its own ventricle.
And then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his breath until the pus is drawn out or appears as an abscess.
And then return him to the said place and signal with your finger the rupture on the bone of the ribcage, signaling the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the chest.
And then ignite the cauterizer, whose form is this:
until it is red and gives sparks. And then reduce the abscess or swelling to its natural shape, and then place your hand on the location in order that the swelling does not increase.
And you have already placed between the joints of the patient and left him to rest one joint, another serving on his legs, another on his feet, which hold their own hands.
And then pause the cauterizer on him, signaling with your hand where the cauterizer stands straight, and make him go into the bone of the ribcage to the middle of the duiduni; and repeat it another time if you have not achieved it in the first attempt, going into the bone.
And observe wisely the signs of the abscess at the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn that abscess for fear that on the patient there will come to death or another great evil.
And know that when you have the cauterizer, do not touch the bone, nor combine your operation.
And it is necessary that the cauterizer for children be subtle according to their age and measure.
And then cure the location of the cauterization for three days with border, until the scar of the fire is renewed.
And then cure him with other remedies until he is healed.
And the patient lies on his back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
And it is necessary that you pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of time of his healing, and that the abscess does not burst forth from the effort of recovery.
And then, after 40 days, gradually make him descend, and keep him thus for another 40 days.
And be reduced in labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of loud voices, for when he uses this regime of entire healing, then he will be healed.
And you will say that the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly is similar to the beginning, and if it does not hold, then cauterize the rupture with a round cauterizer according to his quantity, and let it be like the third part of him; and then cure him as we have said, and it will not adjust.
And some firsts have already said that the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cauterizer according to this form, since it is signaled by intention:
and it is a paused line that goes by the latitude on the side and above the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a clavish cauterizer, but the first cauterizer is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Cauterization of Twist.
When it occurs in some members due to fracture or percussion, and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cauterizer.
And let the cauterizer be for every member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and debility of it, location of twist and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterizer, good it is; and otherwise, then let there be iteration on him with the cauterizer; for it is customary with those pains to punctuate one member against that member which approaches it, so that you must achieve those with the cauterizer until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some leprosies are made with a cauterizer through great benefit and merit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putridity of fat and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and do not delay, nor hesitate, and fear for the patient that corruption may comprehend his entire body and all his complexion, then cauterize him on the head with many cauterizers: one in the middle of the head, and another a little way off from him, up to the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, place your hand with the cauterizer a little bit into the bone, and make a small impression on the skull, so that the displacement of the bones is caused, and the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and then cauterize on the malleus according to what has been prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with those cauterizers which we have said in the head; and a cauterizer on the extremity of the nose, and two cauterizers on both mallei, and two cauterizers on both vertebrae of the neck, and two cauterizers on the vertebrae of the back, and one great cauterizer on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each ankle bone, and two on each toe, and two on the shoulders, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the phalanges of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are over the tarsus, lest you burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cauterizer on the bone of the ribcage and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauterizers, the more beneficial and suitable it is; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cauterizer, just like they do in their own, because his body is already stupified.
And it is necessary that the cauterizers be great or small according to the members and joints, as directed by the species of the instruments.
And then cure the cauterizer with flour from error, with honey and with other cures until he is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When some member is stunned or asleep and is cured with medicines, oil, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stunned member with cauterizers according to the greatness of the member or its smallness.
And let your cauterizer enter into the profundity of the bone a little bit. And then cure him with a remedy until he is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and at the vertebrae of the back, and then the numbness of the nerves that affect that member is restored.
But do not presume on this unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the Cauterization of Albaras that is Morphia.
When albaras is old and does not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on it with a pre-owned cauterizer for a little bit according to the quantity of the specificity of the bone until its whiteness and color are restored, and its color is changed.
And then cure him with flour of errors and lentils with roasted oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and with blood of dove or with blood of yronda, each part being one portion and all mixed together; and apply a cloth to the location and place it there until he is healed.
Chapter L.
On the Cauterization of Cramp.
When cramp is beginning and you want to relieve it, then cauterize that part with a circular cauterizer in the circle of it as it is revolved.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterizer in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, for I fear it may be ulcinated, and I have already seen this some times.
And it is more suitable that it be cauterized in the circle of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauterizers.
Chapter LI.
On the Cauterization of Adultery.
When some adultery is delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to superfluous making that one, or because of the condition of the patient, for it is old in decrepitude, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the maturation of adultery; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small cauterizers punctating; and apply it until it fastens in maturation.
But if you want the perforation of it with a cauterizer, then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form: and place that in the middle location of adultery until it penetrates the bone.
And if the cauterizer in that location is more distant, because the arm's body is alleviated; and then cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LII.
On the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent is corruption that wanders in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corruption in a location where it would suffer a cauterizer with fire, then ignite small and large cauterizers, many and few, according to what is fitting in that location where the corruption is.
And then cauterize it entirely on all sides until you eradicate all corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
And then apply it for three days, and pause on the locations that have been cauterized with a mixture of oil, so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption.
And then cure him with flesh-generating remedies.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, good it is; but otherwise, then iterate the cauterizer on that which remains in the corrupted locations.
And corruption is medicated some times with acute medicine, for it is a means in place of cauterization. But however, cauterization by fire is more beneficial.
And I have already said the cure of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
On the Cauterization of Nails and Other Similar Things.
Many times it happens that the parts left behind of a patient who has a condition called "claw" are caused by a large, entering wound which lames the foot; and there is cauterization in those places according to two manners: one being cauterization with fire and the other being cauterization with hot water.
But the cauterization with fire is that you ignite the concave-like cauterizer resembling a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw of all parts, and it is of subtle margins.
And then pause that ignited cauterizer on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cauterizer in the circle of the claw until the cauterizer penetrates to the depth of the claw. And then leave it for three days until you begin to see a bruise. And then apply that with wild mallow leaves trampled with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
And then cure the location with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times it happens in the surface of the body, especially on the arms and legs, then you must administer in those places cauterizers with water; and this is that you take a quill made of reed or iron or vulture's beak, and place it on the claw; and then pour into the quill some quantity of hot water, and grasp your hand, and you revolve it with compression from all sides, so that the margin of the quill presses against the root of the claw, and the hot water flows through to the front of the root; and let the patient endure for a little while the burning sensation of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, because the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do this to those places where you have applied the other, until you come upon all of them in their place on the body.
And then cure those places where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with this same flesh-generating remedies which cause the skin to regenerate.
Chapter LIV.
On the Cauterization of Trembling.
When it happens to anyone that they have trembling due to a strain on the nerves or because of a fever caused by a strain, or for any similar reason, then you must cauterize that place with four cauterizers or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterizer; and with a cauterizer in the feet of it, and over the stomach of it, with an olive cauterizer.
And the trembling of him subsides and hastens the recovery from the strain-caused illness.
Chapter LV.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Bruises on the Body.
When on the body there are accidental bruises that burst forth pustules which are caused by gross corrupted matter; therefore it is necessary at first to appear as if so, that the whole head of the fistula be cauterized with a subtle cauterizer made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with roots of long-ago-dried estrogia; or with a lentecular cauterizer.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize beforehand at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, and it is disrupted by the superfluity which forms those, and cures from those.
But however, it is necessary that this be done properly with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the Cauterization of Blood Flux Accidentally Caused by Arrow Wounds.
Many times it happens that blood fluxes of arrow wounds are caused by the incision of the wound itself, or from the opening of apostemes or cauterizers on the member, and thus it resembles, and it is difficult to heal that.
Therefore, as it happens to anyone in this case, then you must take the cauterizer made of your own hand and put it on the wound, and place it firmly upon that, many times, until the blood flux is stopped by the aforementioned cauterizer, and there is no more bleeding.
And then pause in the fire the olive cauterizers, small and large, for many times, and exhale upon them until they are thoroughly ignited.
And then take from those one small or large one according to the location and wound in which the artery has been broken, over that vein more quickly than you would have removed the aforementioned, and place the cauterizer on it until the blood is stopped and constricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove the aforementioned and extinguish the cauterizer, then take another cauterizer, carefully selected from those which are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the blood is constricted.
And take care that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that you bring over the patient another harm.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless through one of four methods: or with a cauterizer as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted; or that it be bound with thread or ligament through strong traction, or that medicinal applications are made upon him which virtue is to constrict the blood; and be strengthened with a pillow and constriction decent.
But he who administers constriction decently by ligature and binding with threads or through the position of constricting causes and similar ones, does not come to fruition until late.
But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work with patience on the indication given above over the wound of that vein just as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the superior part of the wound, and on the artery let what has been removed not be; and on top of the artery be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and more carefully in that there is need for cauterization or medicine.
On the Incision and Perforation, Wounds, Bleeding, and their Similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all illness in which cauterization with fire is suitable and with medicine that constrains, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments needed in those places, and we have organized the chapters from the highest part of the head to the feet.
And you will proceed in this chapter by that same manner, so that whoever wants to know about it may be illuminated on what has been requested.
And before you begin this, dear son, take note that in this chapter it is about the same terror as in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times blood evacuation occurs, which contains the life-giving substance that flows through the veins or incision upon an apostema or warning of exit or purging of a wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of a boil and their similar ones. And among all those, accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them, death.
And I admonish you that upon yourself do not fall what is written here, for sometimes you will have to use the ways of men with many mannerisms of illnesses. And among those are some who will flee from their illness and it is easy for them to meet death, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with illness there is fear which means death.
And among those is one who gives you his word and promise, you hoping for his health, and his illness is deadly.
And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to one who comes to you with this manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any cause without aprop certain science which verifies what you see, and which leads to blameless succession.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses the prophecy and indication of that which is converted into health, for in that is aid to you on the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires His understanding in you, and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterization, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be illuminated for you about what you request and which you need.
Chapter One.
On the Cure of Water Contained in the Head of Children.
Know that this illness often occurs in children during the period of childhood and when the fontanelle is still open on the child's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and of all those whom I have seen, death has claimed them, and thus it is what I have witnessed in them.
And I have seen that one child whose head was filled with water and the top of it was always magnificently expanded until he could not contain himself anymore due to the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased to the point of mortal fire.
And this humidity either accumulates between the vertebrae and bone, or accumulates behind the bone above the skull.
Therefore, the operation in that case is to make an incision on the middle part of the skull with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be about two fingers deep until the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the apostema is greater, then two incisions are made in this way:
And if the humidity is behind the bone, then it is signified that you must open up the commissures of the skull all around and squeeze out the water when you compress that with your hand on both sides, and there will be no more hiddenness. It is necessary to make an incision in the middle part of the skull with three fissures in this manner:
And immediately after the incision, extract all the humidity; and immediately strengthen the fissures with cloths and poultices; and immediately immerse that part above in vinegar and oil for five days, and then loosen the ligament and cure the wound with tents and bandages, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision that considers the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or on the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore, attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water, and make it as best you can according to your skill.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and thus avoid bleeding of blood and death of the patient due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Third.
When there is catarrh or rheumatism in the eyes or feet and it is chronic, and there is no agreement on that with medical treatment, then the last resort is to make an incision on those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those which the patient's head is filled with, and immediately freshen up the place with an asperous cloth so that the arteries appear, and immediately strengthen the neck of the patient with a few cloths; and consider on what pulse the vein is; and the places of each one over the places which are near the ears, depressed, and only in some men.
And immediately sign over the artery with a tent, and immediately incise each one with the spatula of each side going up to the incision which penetrates into the bone, and that is so by the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incision on the upper parts.
And the length of the incision should be about two finger-widths, for when some vein is cut, the blood flows out with pulsatile emission, which jumps forth repeatedly.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three finger-widths, and immediately sign with a tent, and go into the bone.
And as much blood as flows out is equal to about one quarter of an ounce. and not too much or too little flows out from it, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the accumulation of the artery in it.
And immediately consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the skull, then incise it in order that no hidden apostema may occur.
And immediately strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and immediately cure it with dressings until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
When some ancient or chronic disease migrates to the temples, due to humid and aggravating conditions, and by the quality of the lacertae in the temples, or an old and violent sores and similar ones, and it is medicated with the methods of medical cure, but this does not help, then we have resorted to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing those just as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient has boils on the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden from most people due to the intensity of heat.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and immediately freshen up the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then take the spatula, the shape of which is: And immediately cut the vertebra with that [spatula] with ease until you reach the artery; and immediately get into it and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the vertebra and uncover those tunics which are below it, of all sides.
But if the artery is subtle, then immediately envelop it with the tip of the spatula, and immediately incise one part of that according to the quantity by which the extensions of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise from all.
And immediately evacuate about one quarter ounce of blood. until three [ounces]
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you divide it into two parts with a double fold of cedarn or cordage to a length, and not fear putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and impending flow of blood.
And immediately incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another nearby.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone and a cauterizer like a scalpel until the extensions of it are incised, and remain in that same place.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a state of scalding complexity; for cauterization is one of those causes that helps to finish off the humidity, and therefore it is better in judgment.
And it is necessary to immediately extract the arteries that fill the place with old blood, and let them rest on decently made powders, and be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some remedies until it is healed.
And if while you are working another vein suddenly bleeds from the artery, then immediately take care to stop that bleeding, either with a cauterizer or by filling the place with old blood, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if any of these causes are not present to you, then immediately pause your touch on the place until the blood is coagulated, and immerse the place in hot water with vehement heat until the acute pain subsides, and strengthen it as needed.
And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two blades, since you have marked out the two places with a tent, and each one is motionless, until they reach the bone and incise the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extensions of it may be elongated, for it is not fully consolidated by this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer:
And the sharpness of the two blades is exemplary. But even if there is less sharpness than two blades, it is better, for if they are sharp like two blades close to each part of the flesh, and do not cut through the flesh with velocity.
So when there is some thickness in those [blades], it is kept that the heat of the fire is applied to those and the flesh is cut away slightly.
And this work is better than all other works and easier.
And the space which is between two blades is equal to the thickness of a digit.
Chapter Fourth.
On the Cure of Eyes with Acute and Acid Lachrymation.
When the eyes have acid lachrymation, and it is the core of those veins which are above the forehead of the head, and does not agree with any cause for medical cure, and the face of the patient becomes red and there is wandering in his forehead like a march of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, wet as if they were crying, and their eyelids are scaled off by the acidity of the tears, the ancient agrimenes mixed into the cure of those with this operation, and named it "spassa".
And it is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on his forehead, and immediately incise in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two finger-widths: one fissure should be equally distant from the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lashes which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three finger-widths adjusted.
And if you have a sponge or cloth with dry fibers which absorb the blood.
And immediately insert the spatula of two sharp extensions, the shape of which is: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Excoriate with that the entire vertebra which is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and immediately make it migrate into the second incision. And immediately take this spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with a different instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the blade of that scalpel so that it touches the flesh annexed to the vertebra, and the edge of it is inserted into the bone, and push it in until it reaches the mid fissure, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
But continue the incision up to where it appears on the vertebra, and immediately make it in the mid fissure into another fissure.
And since there is a quantity of blood equal to that which has coagulated, express the places of the sponge with coagulated blood.
And immediately pause in each fissure with old blood, and pause over those powders made with vinegar, oil, and vinegar mixed together, so that there is no hidden apostema.
And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer great effusion of hot water or tepid water, and immediately cure with ointment basilicon made with rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Chapter Five.
On the Cure of Lachrymation by Cataracts and Eyes Descending from the Parts Behind the Head.
When there are acute and continuous cataracts in some veins and they continue, and the patient's eyes are exhausted and small, and the regard of their pupils is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and their skin dry, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then know by these accidents that the matters and cataracts come only from many veins proceeding from the parts behind.
And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and immediately incise a fissure in the middle of the forehead, about as long as the width of a finger (and begin with the fissure of the left temple and extend it into the right temple; and the incision should be made into the bone; and stretch your hand over the lashes of the temples which are above the mastoid process), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry up all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and immediately fill between the two lips of the fissure with old blood or dry cloths. And immediately strengthen above with powders made with vinegar and oil, so that there is no hidden apostema.
And when you see that the apostema has diminished, then it is necessary to freshen up the bone until it begins to show flesh, and immediately cure with an emollient regimen which will make the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and from them make a poultice, and administer it to these wounds in the natural state of the skin.
Chapter Six.
On the Cure of That Which Causes Humors in the Ears.
All causes that occur in the ears are one of four species, for either it is a mineral peyra or a similar cause, such as iron and lead, or it is from a plant, such as cumin or fava, or it is a fluidic cause, such as water and vinegar and their like, or some animal.
And therefore when peyra occurs in the ear or some other similar cause that does not agree with the ear, and pauses the ear at the sun, and if the peyra times it, then immediately distill into that some cause of violet oil or sassafras, and properly administer the extraction of it, and make the stornutacio to come out in condition, and stop up the nose against the occurrence of stornutacio. And immediately pause in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forgotten about these causes.
And if not, then immediately administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "epicaricatic gestures" which are subtle and have this shape:
And if forgotten about the gestures, it is better so; and if not, then immediately administer the extraction of it with a subtle instrument of slight duplication.
And therefore if not forgotten about this, then immediately make a canal of iron and insert the end of the canal into the opening of the ear and close around the canal with wax and softened oil so that it is only open to the canal. And immediately extract with your breath strong attraction, because many times as we have recounted.
But if not forgotten in this manner, then immediately take from the candlelight or the prepared wax with which birds are caught and taken a small quantity, and pause that on the extremity of the ray, and immediately wrap around that spot decently paused. And immediately insert that into the opening of the ear with ease, and immediately dry out the ear from its humidity.
And therefore if not forgotten about all the causes which we have recounted, then immediately take care to cut off that before it becomes a hidden apostema or spasm.
And the method of cutting off that is to first bleed the patient from the sephasic vein and extract blood according to the virtue of it, and immediately make that cease between your hands and convert the ear to the parts above, and then close with a small fissure in the root of the ear over the grey matter in the location previously prepared. And let the fissure be of a lunar shape until it reaches the peyra, and when the peyra is atrophied, stop that if possible with appropriate instruments; and immediately close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the cause is in the ear is one of the fat that you consider and which swells, then immediately administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your sight, then immediately take a subtle spatula according to this shape: and administer with that the removal of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause in many pieces, and immediately extract those from them with onces or subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for it is facilitated the extraction of it.
But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutacio in condition at first, and fill his own ear with some old blood, and pour over that ear where the water is, and if forgotten, good; but if not, then take many sharp peyres and lemons according to the length of a finger, heat those in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of them into the opening of his own ear and strike with another peyra on the peyra that is behind the ear. Therefore do not stop until all the water has been forgotten.
Therefore do not stop until all the water has been forgotten. And then the water will be forgotten, just as you take paper or parchment and... and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end with fire until the wax is burnt.
And then take another piece of parchment and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract that with a cannula just as described above.
But if an animal enters into that ear, whether it is small or great, and the cause appears to the sense of smell, then immediately administer the extraction of it with gestures and onces, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that occur in the ear.
But if there is a worm generated in the ear, when you cure that with water as we have said in the division and treatise on distillations, and your cure does not agree, then it is necessary to gaze at the ear towards the sun.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then immediately extract that with gestures or subtle onces, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula made of straw and expanded above, which is shaped like this: And insert the subtle end of it into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and immediately suck with force through it, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if it does not obey you in this way, then immediately stop and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillations.
And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the shape of which is: And make that of silver or iron, made from straw, with a small hole in it and a plate on top.
And therefore be as they are driven to what is in the convergence of the cannula of content here where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it around the end of it decently cut off, and immediately pour oil into the convergence of the ascent, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the cannula -- and that is in the ear --, and immediately insert the ray with a cut-off end and press gently with your hand on that with a mild compression so that the oil is expelled into the convergence of the ascent and the patient feels the oil outside.
And what is inserted in the ear is already scarified with fire, a little bit. And beware that the cause which you are about to distill in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear cannot withstand it.
Chapter VII.
On the Cure of Earwax.
Some times, some children are born with the vents of their mothers unperforated, and this already occurs in some men, opilacio in the meatus of the ear due to a wound or flesh not perforating in that place; and this opilacio sometimes is made in the prominence of the tract of the ear which does not allow the sense of smell, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the prominence of it, which does not comprehend the sense of smell, is in the greater difficulties of difficult healing.
And in that which comprehends the sense of smell, it is necessary to pause the ear of the patient towards the sun and gaze at it. And therefore if there appears an apparent obstruction, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
If the end of it is in the ear where there is a small width, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two lion's claws to prevent any harm to the ear.
And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meatus, then immediately take that with subtle onces and cut into it with a vehement ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the prominence of the ear, then immediately take a subtle iron rod and heat it with fire for a little while, and then insert that into the meatus of the ear.
And therefore if you have sensed obstruction with what the patient feels with ease, due to the gravity of having it, force the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And immediately apply a cloth soaked with the liquid according to the quantity of the width of the channel which you have wrapped in Egyptian bandages; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some powder and pour it into water and pulverize over it as it is sown, and use it; and if the ear has already become apostemated, then immediately extract the liquid and replace it with another liquid which you have wrapped in wax that has been made with rose oil, until the apostema is calm; and immediately cure that until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then immediately submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cure of Athazil, which afflicts the eyelids.
Athazil, which afflicts the eyelids of some people sometimes moistens them, and at other times makes them dry.
Therefore, take those with tenacious or onces, and cut them with a spatula of their own roots, and immediately apply it to the places as sown.
But if pain with bleeding occurs, then immediately cauterize those with a subtle lunar cauterizer.
And the best cauterization is to do it near the incisions and many times when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Chapter IX.
On the Cure of Grandiness which comes to the eyelids of humans.
Many times, something develops in the eyelids of humans due to some cause which is related to grandiness in its strength and hardness, and because of this grandness it is called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the operation in them is that you should immediately consider whether the grandiness is proceeding from there to the eyelid and is spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Therefore, make an incision on it with a fine fissure by the width, and immediately examine that of all parts with ease until it evaporates, and then suspend it with onces and cut off.
And if the figure is great, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, because the humor of it restores that and fleshifies.
And if the grandiness is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, you must smooth the surface outwardly; then immediately elevate the eyelid and suspend the grandiness with onces, unless you need an incision, and press that from all sides, and if the eyelid by incision becomes lengthened, this will not come into any cause.
And immediately after the incision, wash the eyes with salted water; and cure the place with that which fleshifies until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the Cure of Axirna in the eyelid above the eye.
Axirna is a grayish substance which is generated in the tunic of the eyelid above, and most often develops in children, aggravates their eyes, and causes great pain to them; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of it, for tears are shed upon them.
And therefore you should often wash their faces with water at all times, and on their faces they sleep; and thus the eyelids of theirs below are covered with humidified lids, which have already been inflated, and a visible approach to swelling is in the eye; and when you press the location with those things I said, you will bring forth swelling into it.
And some method of operation is in that which the patient places his own head on the edge of the bed, and immediately pauses a cloth of linen and of wool, and makes of it a ball; then immediately makes a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach of all parts, and immediately pauses that upon that and presses with those things I said from all sides so that swelling may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and immediately ends in the middle of that humidification with a spatula incised by a fissure by the width, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in phlebotomy.
But in the prominence it is necessary to cut through the cord completely until you reach the swelling, because in the greatest difficulties process of swelling by fissure according to the form of white greasiness.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said ties and the outer parts and revolve between the right hand and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and thus cause damage to it.
But if you do not find swelling at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease until swelling processes; and immediately extract it as we have said; and immediately submerge cloths of linen in water and vinegar, and pour them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
And thus all that remains of that moisture is salted and poured into the convergence of the fissure, so that this which remains of that moisture.
And immediately cure it until it is healed.
But if an apostema occurs in the place, then immediately cure it with caustic poultices until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On Methods of Touching the Eye.
When in the eyelids of humans there are noted by the adjustments below the natural skin and are becoming old, then immediately those things do not belong to the eye and make ways for bad diseases such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and tissue until that is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye; and cure it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or by sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made into an atactini by incision and suture; or by canals as you will say.
And therefore it is necessary that you pause the head of the patient on the edge; immediately convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, so be it; and if not, then insert a needle into that which has felt of the part below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the felt above, and thus - right next to the margin of the eyelid where the skin is - next to the skin, and pull the felt upwards towards the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
And immediately end at the outer part of the eyelid below the skin adjusted with spatula incised from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and immediately extract the needle and pause below the eyelid with small powders of coto or cloth, and immediately send over the eyelid with tentation, and it will be thus as a figure of myrtle fuel.
But in any case it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified among humans, for some of them are those who need to have a large quantity incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And immediately end with the spatula on both lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is right next to the natural skin, just as it is the widest part of a king.
And immediately insert the onces into one of the two angles of the cord, and immediately extract it all, and immediately adjust with a stitch the two lips or fine wool thread, and wash away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two eyelids with some visible causes, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
And immediately loosen the stitch of the threads within three or four days, and immediately cure it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching and cure it with that which dries and strengthens, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of humors; but stitching is better. And thus I say to the ancients who taught to taxinate.
But in this case there is solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and not from fear.
And there is another method in taxinating, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure such as myrtle leaves, and immediately elevate the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
But if it is not possible to take the threads, and this is not adjusted, then immediately take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and enter the other thread next to the lacrimal major, and the second thread next to the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said ties the threads in equality, and immediately raise your hand with equal elevation, raise all the cord above which is marked as we have recounted.
And immediately adjust the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed.
But if an apostema occurs due to your incision or your fissure, calm that apostema with cerote and like it, and with gentle motions.
And sometimes it is necessary to touch the eyelid which its own skin is converted, then it is necessary that you use in it what we have said about incision; but stitching in each case is more artificial.
Atactinating with canals is according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and immediately by art make two canals or two thin tubes, of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is smaller than the width of the spatula. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
And immediately add each one with subtlety over that which is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and compress the canals of each part with a strong constriction, and leave it for some days, because the cord will die and become denigrated and will sink in until it comes back.
But if it is delayed, then immediately cut the cord with scissors, and immediately cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On Elevating Painful Skin in the Eye with a Needle when the Skin is Hard.
When the skin is non-natural, hard and rough, and painful to the eyes, the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and insert it into that subtle thread of cedron and linen, and immediately adjust the extremities of it and notice what each one does in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be equal to the quantity of one palm.
And immediately compose another fine thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that one if you wish.
And immediately place the patient's head on the edge, and be right next to the sun so that your work may be declared, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
And immediately insert the needle into the root of the skin adjusted which has required an engineer, and make that thread penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural skin.
And immediately pull the skin up and insert it into its place, and be the number of skins one, two, or three, but not more.
And immediately pull your hand with that until the skin is outside-put and in its place in the eyelid with the natural skin.
But if it is pulled out of its place and the skin is not put outside, pull it to the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is put outside above the uppermost part.
And look at that with the vision of the eye, for you will take out the thread and the skin, and grate some and clean the eye, and leave the closure for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its place and grows above it good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust one long piece of natural skin, and elevate it with that, or leave it so that it will be lengthened to its proper space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cure of Echachatry which appears in the Eyelid above.
When it appears in the eye echachatry, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards or sideways, to the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this echachatry either is natural or accidental, and is made by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
The method of the operation in this case is that you open up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary that you use a cure for this condition from the causes which dry and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to echachatry even worse than before, having no time at all.
Use in that condition causes which soften, such as fenugreek, and mix it with the water in which are steeped high-quality seeds of linen or yarrow, or a gentle poultice made from aquilon, which is liquefied with some oil, and submerge the cloth in that mixture, and cure it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all skill and art, not allowing anything to be consolidated in its place, according to the form that was present at the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is nothing but some correction of echachatry that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the Cure of Echachatry which is made in the Eyelid below.
This echachatry which is made in the Eyelid below, which is truly named echachatry; and it is either of a natural or an accidental cause.
But accidental is caused by wound, section, cauterization, or other similar things.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal canal on the left to the lacrimal canal on the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And immediately extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a spatula of good width. And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns to its natural shape as it should, that is good; and otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the cleft figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the side of the eyelid below.
And the extremities of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and be of their own making angle, such that when they come together, it forms a figure of its own.
And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
And immediately stop the flesh at that point, for the quantity is the thickness of the eyelid below, which is the natural shape.
And immediately adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and immediately cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if echachatry occurs due to fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you open a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid, as was previously described. And immediately separate with a poultice between two lips, according to what we have said.
In the summary of this sermon on the cure of echachatry when it is above or below, which flows into the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of echachatry, and that is in the form of diverse manners.
And the skilled artisans always prepare skillfully in each possible manner, so that they may return the figure to its natural form or nearly so, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or to the Cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many people, it is solidified above the eyelid to the point where the album of the eye, and it hinders the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the end of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards or extend it with a thread.
And immediately you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the incisions, having only a small obtuseness so that the malady is not disturbed during the operation, and then remove the spatula so as not to disturb the eye with its sharpness.
And may your incision be such that it easily excises that adhesion, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And immediately put into the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distill on it in a gentle manner, dissolved in water.
And immediately separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and place it on the eye infused in albumen of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate, until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the Incision of the Eyelid and the Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal Canal.
Know that an eyelid is according to two ways, for either it is nervous, and resembles a hard, thin ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white humidity congealed, which when iron touches it, becomes hardened and the needle cannot be inserted into it.
And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, and then gradually cover the eye, prohibiting light and movement.
But the method of working in this incision is that the malady puts its head in its place, and immediately opens the eyes of it, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and immediately collects the eyelid with a needle of slight duplication and extends it to the upper parts. And immediately take a needle and insert into it a piece of horse, ox, or cow hide, or something similar, or a strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread the eyelid; and extend it to the upper parts, and excise on the edge of the eyelid which sees the pupil. And thus you will follow that with the hide until the very end of it.
And immediately you incise the remainder in the root of the lacrimal canal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and remove the natural flesh of the lacrimal canal so that through the incision of it no continuous flow of tears may ensue.
And some days later the eyelid with the extended needle or thread, as we have said, and immediately excise it with a lion's spatula whose form is this:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and avoid a rupture in that place, lest the pupil be perforated.
And immediately the incision gets in the eye a little bit of salt or the juice made from sinew, and leave it until the next day; and then cure that with water as needed, until it is healed.
And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it taken in that place by the thread, then many times this type of eyelid is cured with medicines, and is healed thus as I have said and recounted in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you will work on the eye of the malady and take a subtle spatula lion with sharpness according to this form: with subtlety. And if at times that is rarefied and is confused and enters into the root of it, then you will distill from your hand in the eye juice made from sinew or with raw onion or with salt crushed, and cover the eye until the next day.
And immediately repeat the operation on that until all that is of it is removed, except for the contrary apostema which is in the eye, because then you will leave it, and cure the apostema at first until it is healed.
And immediately repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye with great harm, is suspended with a thread; and incise that part of it, and do not finish the incision for fear of continuous flow of tears.
And immediately distill in the lacrimal juice made from onion and sinew until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the Incision of Algae-like growths and of Water that is born from flesh adjusted in the Eye.
Some times in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or strengthens on the eyelids and lightly presses them against the parts above and is assembled like a rose window.
But the operation in this case is that the malady puts its head in its place; and immediately opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with suitable thread, and tie it with a forceps or with a basket; and immediately incises the flesh at first until all is finished with the needle, and be careful not to disturb the eye lest you spoil your operation.
And be the incision with which you incise those or with a spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the eyelid, or with small forceps with which it is collected according to the form that comes closest to this chapter.
And thus when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt, or distill in it a red powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place on the eye above a thin layer of albumen of egg to ensure against apostema.
And if any cause of algae-like growths is present and is Lord of the sanguineous apostema caution, and you fear apostema caution, then leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with water which dissolves that apostema, and immediately repeat the operation on that until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
But however you must know that alienates all cure of the eye by way of natural or accidental means, work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member is capable of that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Collection of Sabellum in the Eye.
Sabel is a reddish-colored vein which forms knots on the eye and prevents the eyelid from performing its operation, and opens up the eye along with length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which the sabel is present is strong and in it there is no other disease besides sabel, then you collect that sabel.
And it is that you command the malady to put its head in its place, and immediately suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your prudence; and be that thread of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two threads gradually woven into one body according to this form:
And immediately those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and turned back.
And be careful that you do not touch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be steadfast in your operation so as to incise only those veins.
And when you have completed, then you will distill in the eye juice of green or red onion so that with its sharpness it may corrode the water that is removed from the sabel.
But if that is not possible for you, then collect all of it in that hour, and immediately apply all the water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is sedated and is ensured against caution.
And immediately repeat on it in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On the Reduction of Arthritis to the Nose.
When you cure arthritis with cauterization or acute medicine as it is preceded by the narrative of it and does not heal, then do not intervene in it but instead make incisions on the apostema of maturity until all the humidity that is in it is extracted and dried out so that the bone is revealed.
And therefore when the bone is exposed and times in it corruption or blackness appears, then you will scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called the "aspre cap", and it is made of iron, and its head is rounded like an ash which has been pointed by a lime point or sharpened to a subtle point (such as it is in this form).
And place that on the decayed part of the bone, and immediately turn it between those said points, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is gone.
And this be done several times, and immediately restore the place with drying and purgative causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the body of the disease has been cut off and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed and is not apostemated and there is no accident in it, then you will know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then do not intervene in it but rather reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you remove a second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take a thread according to this form:
Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it be first exhausted to the tip just so that it is as if you were to bite it.
And immediately place that on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little further into the eye, and immediately turn your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the malady by which it finds vent to come out so when you pull your hand.
Therefore then restore the place with purgative medicines that dry, just as they were applied.
Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the material that flowed to the parts above returns to the nose, therefore this is more gentle on the malady.
Chapter XX.
On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
When the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no accident or diminution in it, then you must relax the malady, and immediately follow, and immediately pause breathing on the neck without scarification and suck for good suction; and immediately place a poultice on the eye which is made of acacia, aloe, and sarsaparilla, and immediately strengthen the application on the eye with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make powder from those.
And immediately place one on top of the other according to the quantity which the eye requires. And immediately strengthen on top of those with a strong cloth, and repeat the suction without scarification; and immediately stop the suction and leave the eye straight for a day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament is relaxed, then you must make it tight.
And immediately stop the ligament for a day and night just as we have said.
And if the eye is already reduced, well it is; and otherwise, then immediately repeat the application with powders, ligament, and suction until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
When the tunica uvea becomes disrupptive and protrudes forth between the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and its shape is that of a man for this reason, and you want to incise it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, which is that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the left side and above, and immediately place another needle in the double thread part near the lacrimal, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and immediately incise the location of the double thread and lift up with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
And immediately extract the needle and place it on the eye lanolin infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls away from the uvea.
And immediately cure the eye with water that comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather all the parts with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to the great eminence, and immediately be perforated by a subtle spatula that comes before the eye, and flow out the albigenous moisture, and descend the eye and enter soon.
And immediately strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the Cure of Alconatitis.
This disease which is called alconatitis is nothing but inflammation that is adjusted in the eye resembling descending water and not that.
But the manner of working on it is that you make the malady cease upon the prepared and right couch, and immediately take hold of your own head with both hands and bring it down into the part where you see the inflammation reaching, and immediately dry it up so that it does not descend, and stop the light, and the malady sees the causes just as if it saw.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent of the inflammation with water as we have said, then make the malady cease between your hands and immediately take a subtle spatula and place it on the panniculus cernenting a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (until the location is forgotten), until the inflammation is forgotten.
Therefore when it is forgotten, then you will distill in the eye warm water into which you have mixed honey and water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And immediately be cured by other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cure of the Descending Water from the Eye.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable to pierce according to what we declare, then that one according to health.
Then you must make the malady cease between your hands on a cloth and tie up your own eye so that it is very tight.
And immediately place your left hand near the eyelid of your own eye if the eye in which the water is flowing is the left one; or with your right hand if it is the right one.
And immediately with your right hand take almond, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
And immediately place the extremity of almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and immediately anoint with virtue and turn your hand around it.
And immediately penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that almond has already penetrated to the desired cause.
And it must be the measure of the path of almond to reach the precursor the measure of space which is that of the pupil from the beginning of darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
And immediately place almond into the location where the water is, and immediately attract it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends at once, then you will see the malady cured over which it had its view at once, and almond in your own eye.
And immediately pause for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you will put aside that other time before almond is exhausted.
And therefore when it is dry and no longer descends, then you will extract almond with ease, and turn around with it your hand a little at a time, and immediately dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and with that wash the eye outwardly; and immediately pause outside the eye with cotton or stopper or lanolin infused in rose oil and album of egg white, and tie with water your own eye.
But those of our time place on it a comb made of albumen of eggs.
And if it does not obey your almond at the instrument of the eye because of its hardness - for some men have eyes that are very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
And therefore pierce with it that conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, and it is only if you make a way for almond to reach the subtle location.
And immediately insert almond according to what we have said.
And complete the complement of your work, be prepared for the sleeping malady to descend in which it will sleep on its own back in a dark house, and be prohibited from all movements.
And pause in the nature of it so that its nature is aligned, and do not upset your head to the right or left side at all.
And be the ligament according to its disposition for three days.
And immediately release it into that darkest place and expose the most hidden view, and make it see some causes, and immediately return to the ligament on the 7th day.
And do not make this so in the hour of the cures or almost immediately after the infusion. They have to be careful that you do not make this so because the water can flow more easily through great and violent regard.
But if an apostema occurs, then you must release the eye before the 7th day and correct it with water that calms the apostema.
And then you will absolve the vision of it and pause on the face of it orally so that it is guided by it for some days, existing in the darkest place.
And immediately be gotten from that dark place gradually and converse with its causes.
And know that in each case, the disciple is not exempt from some vision occasionally, and then you will be bold on the operation.
And now it has been reached to us from some of those who are in Artach, and some said that a fire is made in Ayrac, greatly perforated at the place where the water is sucked.
But however, I do not see that in our land which has perfected this, nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan by which one is above those who do not know them:
And these are made of iron or of bronze properly, and they are the extremities of their own, with this subtlety triangular, the sharp end just like that is the form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Cure of Noxious Flesh in the Nose.
When in the nose there are born various fleshy growths, some of which are caused by a cause resembling Scorpio's heavy weight or Polyp's flesh; and this disease is called Polypus because it resembles that flesh represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, bluish-gray in color; and of it also is the lion's flesh not gray.
Then in that which is not fraudulent nor cancerous lion's flesh, you must make the malady cease between your hands and place it in the sun, and anoint the nose with it, and pierce it once or twice in those fleshy growths. And immediately extract it from the parts above, and immediately insert into that which you have comprehended from those with a sharp subtle spatula of one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if there remains any cause by which ablation is possible, then you must ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains. But if there is bleeding or an apostema occurs, then you must pause in that which is necessary; or it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the bleeding ceases and all the cavities are removed.
And immediately be gotten in the nose with an incision, either by water or vinegar. But if the nose is open and moisture proceeds from it into the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is noxious flesh in the sinuses of the nose which has not been removed.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce the point of the needle into that which has some thickness, and push it gently, and pause between each thrust the quantity of the said or more, and generate the malady and introduce one end of the needle into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
And after this has been done, that you draw your odorament into the nostrils so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and be exhaled over your gullet, for many times they seem to do this at school, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do.
And immediately pause the two extremities of the needle, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately administer a closure of flesh with the knots that are in the needle, and do this until you know that the flesh is already bound by the knots of the needle.
And immediately extract the needle, and pause in the nose about the abstraction of blood one quarter, and do this for three days or more until the scab is completely formed over what remains of the flesh.
And immediately in the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a leaden cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you degenerate from the cure that exists, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a capipurge, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make this of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small open lamp, just like a small shell, and the metal similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument to make a capipurge maker be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you can take that when you need it in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes suitable.
Chapter XXV.
On the Worms in the External Parts of the Nose.
Many times it is born a worm in the external parts of the nose, and it is magnificent and augmented in several days until its appearance is seen.
And therefore you must introduce that into the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. And immediately pause over the place or cauterize with medicine which is in the location of it.
But if its insertion is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it is calcified, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times the one who inserts this apostema devolves great malice upon the one whom it had.
And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and it is possible to insert that into all of it, then evacuate the malady and insert that without fear, and cure the location with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the Suture of the Nose, Lips, and Ears when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarness.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except among certain men.
Therefore, when you need to treat some cause of those, you must consider whether it is fresh wound with its own blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and immediately cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then you must excise each part of its own codeen that appears until blood comes out. And immediately adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on top of those sprinkle blood of dragon and well-trimmed fat, and pause over the powder one piece of emplastrum diaphanic or some other consolidative plaster, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then release that and change that plaster and leave it until the wounds are completely removed, and immediately cure with a scab until it is healed.
But the method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with needle and thread as I make it known.
Chapter XXVII.
On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the Two Lips in the Parts Behind.
Many times it happens that certain men in the Parts Behind of their Lips have some hard and stubborn apostemas resembling errors, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Therefore you must convert the lips and fissures each of those hardnesses of all parts, and immediately fill the location with sagacious fat until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with vinegar and be cured the location with what exists and is stiptic, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Insertion of Adjusted Flesh into the Gums.
Great many times they have said over the gum adjusted flesh which the ancients called albulus, therefore you must suspend that with a needle or that you take that with forceps and insert it as it should be, and let the blood flow or run.
And immediately pause over the location with sagacious fat or other powders that are stiptic or excitant.
And if the flesh returns, then immediately reinsert it secondarily, and cauterize it, for immediately after cauterization it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts behind and those of the front and between the gums, there are adjusted rough, sharp, and some blackened, and some yellowed or greenish, so that the gum is corrupted by it, and the teeth become loosened.
And therefore you must make the malady cease between your hands and pause the head of it in its own place, and ratify the teeth on which those roughnesses and causes similar to sand appear, until there is no longer any cause remaining, and do this with the blackness and yellowness and other things so that they are purified.
Therefore, if this is the beginning of the reason, good is; and if not, then you must iterate the reason on those for another day and second and third until it reaches the final statement in what you desire.
And know that teeth have needed many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And therefore, because the remedies with which the tooth is rased from the part behind are different from those with which it is rasped between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of remedies must be prepared by you which you will see at once:
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
Therefore you must cure the tooth of its pain with all care and attention in every extraction of it, because there is no cause that surpasses the frequency of its occurrence when it is extracted, for it is a subtle substance entering into excuse in the extraction of it.
But when the malady is firmly seated in that tooth to be extracted, then you must be certain that it is a painful tooth, because many times the pain deceives the malady and claims to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and immediately the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers.
Therefore, since you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and when you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in the place where there is some virtue, so that it dissolves from the tooth to the gum of all parts, and then immediately remove it with those said ditz, or with fine forceps little by little until it is extracted.
And immediately grasp in it with great forceps for good speaking or strong extraction, and pause the head of the malady between those said ditz that hold you not to be mauled, and then extract the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the malady.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it deep into the tooth from all parts with facility and effort the removal of it as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is bruised or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap with cloth that bruise and strengthen it with a thin thread at the extremity of a subtle ray so that it is not torn in the hour of your constriction upon it when you take hold.
And it is necessary that you work with great exactness with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and leave a part of it, and return to the malady for the maliciousness which is greater than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their recklessness and audacity in the extraction of their teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be torn out, and the roots of their remaugudas all or some of those, or that you extract it with some bones from the jawbone just as many times we have testified.
And immediately after extraction, wash the mouth with vinegar or lemon juice and salt.
And if there is bleeding after this, just like many times there has been, then immediately sprinkle some quantity of rose water and apply it to the wound, and if that rose water does not concur, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tongs with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning should be one of long extremity, short handle and thick, so that they are not doubled when you must work with them.
And should be like times of thick handle so that when you strain with those, they are not doubled, having short extremities.
And should be made of Indian iron with descending shapes and right angles, and in the extremities of those, there are teeth which fit into each other and strain by construction descent strong, and some times the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, so it is guarded, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Extraction of Teeth and Dislocation of the Bones of the Mandibles Broken.
When you must extract the tooth which is broken due to some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the location with border for one day or two until the location is mollified; and immediately introduce algid or tongs into the extremities of those which are assembled at the beak of a bird called ciconia or guard, the shape of the forceps:
The extremities of them are made behind like a file or alfalfa.
And if you do not obey your eye to these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary that you dig into the root and uncover all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name of atali, so it is a small lever whose form is this:
And be short with a large extremity and a little one, and not entangled, so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, good is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and with a more subtle extremity.
And already help yourself with this instrument having two prongs of which this is the form approaching the next: and with other instruments which precede in scraping of teeth; for already it is made with this instrument which is similar to once great, and this is the form:
of a triangular extremity bent or short, which has some thickness, and not entangled, so that it is not broken.
And also know that the instruments of teeth many are so and similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisans in the art find for themselves by trial and error according to what each operation and diverse illnesses mean; for they are of illnesses to which the ancients did not say nor pause with proper instruments, due to the forms of various species.
But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it becomes disjointed, then immediately apply gentle pressure on that place where it is convenient for instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures such as this form:
And be in that place some thickness gradually, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this.
But if in the bone there is a small fracture, then immediately break that into pieces and cure it with its blackness, and heal that until it is well.
Chapter XXXII.
On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
When the teeth are elevated and not according to their natural form, and more so when they involve women, and most especially venerable girls; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is very close to another tooth, and there is no possibility of suture or ligament of it, then immediately remove that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you must insert it with this instrument which has the form of a pig's jawbone, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
And be your insertion with which you insert it in many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not like another tooth.
And if the elevated tooth is exposed to erosion, then immediately file it with a file made of Indian iron which has this form:
And be all of Indian iron and its margin well-shaped; and be with many small points like a file which is made of hairpins, by which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with ease, so that it is not another tooth deformed and spoiled. And then line it up at the end, and break it off with some rasors.
And if a tooth is broken and the tongue lies on it, then it is necessary that you file it down until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and smoothed, and filled in so that the tongue does not lie on it nor corrupt the word.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Restoration of Deformed Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
When accidents happen to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the malady cannot be strengthened over that which remains, and you have treated it with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then because they do not decay immediately, it is necessary to strengthen them with a gold wire and not silver, for silver becomes green and soon becomes loose, but gold never changes.
And the wire is in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recitation is that you take the wire and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two turns of the wire between two deformed ones, or if only one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the treatment until you reach the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not deformed.
And be your traction by which you tighten the wire on the roots of the teeth that do not decay.
And then insert the superfluous extremities of the wire with forceps or tweezers, and add them to each place with gestures, and convert them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the deformed one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen it just as stretched tight.
But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that one or those with another wire in such a manner for all its time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the recitation of two healthy teeth and two deformed ones, just as these linked:
And when one returns or two nearby the falling of each in its place, and are reborn just as we have recounted, and remain.
And only skilled artisans can do this.
And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow bones, and is made from them in the form of a tooth, and is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the Insertion of the Ligament Which is in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
This ligament which is left behind the tongue sometimes or is natural to it and which one has not, or accidental and occurs by injury that is already consolidated.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the malady, its own head being situated in your tongue; and raise your tongue, and then insert that nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its recency.
But if in that there is some hardness or nodulation, and this is fixed by the consolidation of injury, then you must gently loosen it and cut through with latitude until you have dissected the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
And beware that there is not a fissure made in the forehead of the flesh, and that you do not cut here archery and bring forth a flow of blood.
And then be washed the vestige of the incision with warm water or vinegar, or with lukewarm water; and then pause for a moment after the tongue is freed; thus is the manner which holds the malady from the tongue in every night so that it will not consolidate again.
But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the location with a poultice made from vinegar; but if the blood flows, then immediately cauterize the location with a caustic lint which corresponds to this. And then treat that one with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the Extraction of Ranula Left Behind the Tongue.
Sometimes a swelling appears behind the tongue, resembling a small tumor that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and very little is magnified until it fills up the mouth.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the malady, sitting in front of the sun and considering the swelling.
And if it is a dark or black, hard lump that the malady does not sense, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you must put the once into it, and insert that with a subtle spatula, and dissect all around; and if blood flows on the hour of your operation, then pause for a moment above a poultice made from vinegar, so that the blood may be restrained.
And then return to your work until you have treated it in its entirety, so that it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with the other cure corresponding to this, until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the Extraction of Swellings from Two Ears and that which is nothing in the Groin and other Swellings.
When there is a swelling in the groin, so are the glands which are assembled together, which swell up and are named two ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you must consider whether the swelling is hard, of dark color, and of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; before let that one ripen, and then either you will break it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root of it is subtle, then that one must be dissected.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling of it has rested or not, and whether it has rested completely or diminished by some diminution; and then make the patient sit down before the sun, with his head in its own place, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, left behind an instrument very noble which is as follows:
And be made of silver or iron, and be subtle like a knife.
Therefore, when you take the tongue and it is shown to you the swelling, and gaze upon that with your own eyesight, then take the once and place that in the amnion, and pull that out as far as you can. Or else, another cause that pulls some of the tunics, and then insert it with an instrument which has this form:
Or else, another cause that pulls some of the tunics, and then insert it with an instrument which has this form: and is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, made of Indian iron well-enough.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then insert it with a spatula which has this form of it: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have dissected one notch, then insert the other in the same manner of insertion, and immediately apply the insertion to the malady with lukewarm water.
But if there is bleeding, apply lukewarm water of decoction of scorzonera or myrtle leaves and similar to that of the stiptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure that one until it is healed.
And sometimes you find other swellings in the groin besides those two ears, and dissect those according to what I have said in the dissection of two notches with a spatula.
And you have already treated a woman who had a swelling in her groin which was turning black, of little sensation, which had closed up the groin of hers, and the woman was breathing with great difficulty, and had already prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and was on the point of death if you had not acted within a day or two.
And the swelling had grown so much that it had opened up two holes, through which pus was flowing through two channels.
Therefore you must proceed fisturally and get stuck in one of them once, and pull that out, and as it comes forth with a great piece, and then you insert the other once into the understanding of the other channel, and then you force the mouth open, and grasp its tongue, and then you place the once in that swelling.
And immediately you cut off a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it. Therefore the groin of that woman was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then you prescribed food for her, so that you did not cease to dissect that swelling many times over a long period, and successive swellings occurred in the same place, which were dissected until it was prolonged.
Therefore I generated this and caused the groin of her to be cauterized, thus adding a new element; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done for that one with me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Dissection of an Uterus when it is Swollen.
When the catarrh settles in the uterus, and it is swollen and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is on the left side big and round, then it is called a bubble.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree, and if only sometimes that swelling again becomes a lump of it and is subtle, then you must dissect those which are aggregated round; and if it is as long as that, and it is sanguine, of dark color or black, and has no sensation, then you must tremble at the dissection of it, for in that there is fear over the patient.
And when you take that one according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, so that you make the patient sit down and press the tongue with an instrument whose form is as follows: and immediately place the once in the newness, and pull that down and dissect it with one of two instruments which are said in the dissection of two notches.
And you must not dissect that one unless it is adjusted to the natural term with an addition, for if you dissect more than that, you will deprive yourself of your own speech.
And then the dissection, use what we have recommended in the dissection of two notches, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the dissection of it, then you must use cunning in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cauterizer in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in its own place, and immediately press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and immediately take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm with it a living cause, and pause it not dense nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
So that the extremity of it is in the concavity where the medicine is paused just as the concavity of a spoon is, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the vulva, and the patient will stretch out his hand over his own lap for so that the saliva or mastication of the mouth of that one will come forth by the intrinsic medicine, in order that it may not descend from any cause upon the groin of it and corrupt that.
And then take your hand and the medicine, and press that upon the uvula for the space of a quarter hour until you see it to be darkened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap that around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube on top so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then release it when it becomes dry and falls away three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then apply the cauterization abstergent in the circuit of the uvula with a cloth wrapped around it, and clarify with that what is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and be washed with lukewarm water, and be cured externally with embrocation, and internally with gargling until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more saved than dissection and more free from fear.
And sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and dissection, for it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, saffron, origanum, ruda, Arabic gum, camomile, and similar herbs to those, and combine all those causes or some of them into a pot, and let them be submerged in lukewarm water, and boil; and the pot is well stirred with decent stirring, and there is a hole in the middle of the pot, on which is placed an instrument made of iron or silver according to this manner.
And the extremity is inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the tongue, until the uvula becomes very darkened.
And then repeat this many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of swellings, for too much would settle in the swelling, and you must not do that, but rather declare the swelling of it beforehand.
But if you don't have this instrument, then take a reed and shape it at the extremity of it into a stopper of wood, so that the mouth of the patient is blocked, for the stopper of wood prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the Extraction of Thorns and that which adheres in the groin and other causes.
Many times it adheres in the groin or thorn of a pea or some other cause.
Then it is necessary that you extract what appears from those things which are visible to the eye, for as you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the groin.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the groin, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because very soon the cause annexed to the groin will be forgotten by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or root of lettuce or a small loaf of bread; or take a piece of marine sponge, and bind it tightly with twine, and then make the patient swallow it, so that when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten. And then take an eel and bind it tightly with twine, and have it placed inside and slowly extracted; or take a basket and have it placed inside and slowly taken out.
But if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And be more thick than a small reed, and in the extremity of it be a concavity which you insert into its groin with ease.
And it raises its head upwards and be careful that the touch of its bone in the throat, for so that it may discover the body and with that which enters into the bone or spine, or that it places itself in its own hand.
But then the patient that inserts is honey, by its knowledge of the location of the annexed cause and enters in below, and pulls out its hand with the instrument on it, all according to the quantity which is prepared at it until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the Extraction of Blood-sucking Worms attached to the groin.
When the blood-sucking worm is medicated with what we have said in the division of cures with medicines and it does not agree, consider then in the groin of the patient to the sun, because you have grasped the tongue of it with an instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you find the blood-sucking worm, extract it with a small once or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it, then take a concave tube and insert that into the groin of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the tube an iron heated instrument, and do this many times (until the blood-sucking worm is dead and falls out of the groin) and abstain from giving water to the patient for all day.
And then take a vial full of lukewarm water, and open the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause pass through that and murmur at the water for an hour afterwards by its own hand, because the blood-sucking worm will soon come to sense the water.
But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cinnamon or with assafetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and it will come to be so.
And this is another way of operation in subfumigation, that you take a pot with burning coals and the pot be covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument be placed in that hole; and then proceed to subfumigate; and pause the patient's mouth on the extremity of the tube, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood-sucking worm, for the blood-sucking worm will soon fall.
And if it does not catch, then you repeat the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving water to the patient, and give him salty causes and herbs, and do not let him drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood-sucking worms are extracted from the groin when it is visible; and it resembles forceps like those, except that it has some curvature. which is placed in the groin, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is grasped, with a lime-like point, for so that when you compress any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the sermon in warning of swellings and their section.
The swellings are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And so diverse in their perforation and section by two manners, of which one is by the species of swellings themselves; and therefore that we compress from the humors.
And the second manner is proper to the places where accidents occur in the body, for the swelling that occurs in the head is another than the swelling that occurs in the tail; and the swelling that occurs in the fleshy part is another than the swelling that occurs at the joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
And some swellings are such that they should not be perforated, but rather allowed to mature with the pus in those or its completion.
And other swellings are such that they should be pierced when they are crossed, and not mature according to their completion, just like swellings that are proper to joints. For a swelling that occurs near a joint, the matter of it is prolonged until it pours out what is in its circuit, and then the bonds or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is a swelling proper to the main member, and if you delay perforation of it until it becomes mature on the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce it unripe. Do not pierce it when it is ripe with non-completed digestion, but only that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not pour forth its contents and be elongated towards the outer parts of the anus, causing a fistula, or that it become in its term what is not healed. But you must know the hour of piercing the swelling, and that is when it is mature.
And you must know that it is mature when there is the yielding of pain and the ceasing of fever, and accordingly the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the tip of the swelling, and the other signs.
And therefore you must know that the piercing should take place in the most distant part of the swelling and from the coming forth of the cure of the prominence.
And piercing should be done through the length of the flesh or the body, if the swellings are in the parts of the muscles or of the fat, and in places of the lacertae, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
But when the swelling is in a fleshy part, then it is better that you delay the piercing of it until it is confirmed by the digestion of it according to its completion, just as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus will be prolonged and many foul humors will be brought forth, and therefore the lips of it will become hardened and its depth.
But some swellings should be pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or body, as necessity demands, or according to that which the member requires.
And you must administer a small piercing, and in large swellings, a large piercing and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the swellings.
And others are of swellings in which the cord should be concave and indented, when it is made thus as if bread and cheese were placed together, just like those that occur in troops of dubeclets and buboes.
And of those which are indented with a section having three angles; and of those is one which is indented just like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just like the swellings of the gangrene.
And of those which are indented with a round section and a lunar-shaped section, and resemble them.
But that one which is not like the others, such as superficial swellings of the lion, should be pierced with a superficial or flat piercing only.
And you should know that when the swelling is large and has collected much pus, you must pierce it and not worry about extracting all the pus at once; having extracted one part, prop up the swelling until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and do this many times according to graduation until it is forgotten.
And most especially if the patient is of a fragile constitution, or a woman in childbirth, or a child, or an old person in decrepitude; for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the excretion of pus, and therefore the patient dies quickly, and you must operate on them.
Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and accordingly administer your piercing in which you pierce these swellings, so that you cleanse the plagues and consider then whether the plague of the swelling is slight, or it is a flat section; therefore you must administer some of old wine or vinegar; and if the swelling is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause in each hole until they come together.
And if in the swelling is abscessed a part of the cord or has concavated it in the circuit, then you must fill it with old cloth or a thread made of linen, just as when you have drained pustules or boils, with their moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and accordingly process that and cure it with what is needed from the poultices until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during the hour of your operation, then you must administer lukewarm water and vinegar to the places where a linen cloth is wrapped around it, and pause that over the place of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer a regimen and cure, and powder the ones which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the swelling is a place of many nerves, then you must envelop powders in vinegar and oil carefully, and pause them on those places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you must pause powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all that be hot within three days, just as we have said, and then you must loosen the swelling and cleanse that and administer to it what is needed for its cure until it is healed.
And thus is this what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of swellings universally, but according to the way of distinction which I have said for each swelling in a particular manner by chapters.
Chapter XLI.
On the Section of Swellings which occur on the Cord of the Head.
In the cord of the head, small swellings occur, and of species of nodes which contain tunics that are to their uses; and the species of these are many.
And among them are pustules, and those which contain moisture resembling lime. And among them are those which contain moisture resembling powder, and similar to theirs; and those which are lithoid, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, as you should extract them so that the extraction does not cause constriction of the artery.
And the operation in section of these is that you express them with an instrument whose shape approaches thus, which is called "entromes", until you know what they contain.
Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then you must divide it into sections according to its length, by a superficial section in this form:
And begins at the section of the line .B. up to the line .G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you must excoriate that which contains that moisture, and not leave any cause behind, for many times it returns, if there remains some cause.
And accordingly, you must submerge it in an Egyptian poultice, if present, or else in water and salt; and fill it with that poultice and leave it until the next day, for by this, all that remains of that peel will be corroded.
And accordingly, you must iterate over that poultice with an Egyptian poultice secondly and thirdly if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that peel; then cure the wound with a poultice until it is healed.
And if the swelling contains fatty nodes, then you must incise it in this form: by section having the form of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section and scrape that away from all part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if your artery is constricted, then do what I have recounted first.
And similarly do with the lithoid swelling of section and cure according to what we have said; and section over lithoid swelling is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these swellings which are in the head of certain old men who have little moisture; and this cause is because you incised over one swelling on the head of an old woman and afterwards struck the swelling with a sordid, asperous, white hammer that could not be bent, and if it touched any part, it would wound.
But in other accidental swellings on the head, this is not this chapter, as are the swellings that occur on the heads of children and in the ears, but the section of these all shall be a superficial section.
And pause the piercing of those in the lower part of them, so that it may be alleviated the body of the pus to the lower parts.
And accordingly cure those with what is needed for their cure.
Chapter XLII.
On the Section of Scrofulae which occur in the Neck.
Many times these swellings occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is dissolved into its own tunic, just like in the nodes and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulae are many, for some are lithoid, and some that contain moisture, and some malignant which do not yield to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Tocament, whose color is manifest and is related to the color of the cord, and is spread out to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preponderant, you must incise it with a superficial section from the upper part of the body down to the lower part of the body along the line .G. up to the line .B., and scrape away that entire part, and extend two lips of the cord with an oncus or with many onci if you have need of them, just as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And if the spatula is not sharp enough, that it does not adjust to your touch and inscision, or that it annoys the patient, and you incise something that is not necessary to be incised; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound, and sprinkle vitriol or other powders which stop bleeding, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the swelling subsides and the wound becomes soft and begins to heal. When the blood is abscessed.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
And accordingly, inquire about the sign that your teacher has indicated whether there remains any cause of other small scrofulae, therefore incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the great scrofula, then beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots. Beware that you leave it alone with a doubled force and let it fall of its own accord, without causing any harm.
And accordingly fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in an Egyptian poultice, and accordingly cure that.
And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there remains some superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then beware that you understand how to incise the root of it, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
And as for the scrofulae that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial piercing at the location where you see the spot of maturation, and pause in the piercing so that the pus drains from the lower part of the body, just as we have said.
And accordingly administer piercing, with poultices and similar substances to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And accordingly, when you see the wound already cleansed, then you must cure it with a poultice of generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the Section of the Pithotomy of the Accidental Swelling that occurs in the Gullet.
The ancients described this section as the "Epilhot", and it is not seen in our land that anyone has performed it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men who have squintiness, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this the veins and main arteries of the patient are all here.
But in those who have swellings caused by caustics in the mouth or gullet or ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to flee from the destruction which is made by perforation.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, let us incise the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with small section by latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for a section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood are hollow.
And if the physician is hesitant, then beware that he extends the cord of the gullet with an oncus, and accordingly makes an incision in the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
And accordingly incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified above the section of the canal by the flame which is from that very thing, mixed with water that is broken down and by the abscess of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is come in which perforation is feared, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and close it alone except for the cartilage.
And accordingly administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And let Albucasis say that the summary of the sermon which we have recounted is nothing but that you see some of those swellings have filled up the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the voice of life is extinct, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
And therefore command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it is the malice of life for three days; and then command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And this which I have seen by my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and put it in his own gullet and incised with it a part of the tube of the lung, and you were called to the cure of him, and he began to cough as the dead are coughed out, and uncovered the wound and brought forth the blood which was situated in the small part.
Therefore you were confessed that it had not cut a vein nor an artery, and the breath was from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
And there was not an accident with the servant, except that he became hoarse in his voice, and accordingly some days returned to improvement of his physical condition.
And now I say to you that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Section of the Swelling which occurs in the Gullet outside, and is called Hernia of the Gullet.
This swelling, named hernia of the gullet, is a great swelling according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it be natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no need to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to a swelling caused by constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And it is not necessary to make presumptions about it except in the small one. And you proceed with that and investigate it according to what is said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise it as with the nodes, and extract it with water which contains the peel and bursicles; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly examined, and accordingly cure the location where it needs healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the Section of the Species of Nodes.
Of the nodes, many species and you have already said all the species of them in the division.
And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence, lest there be doubt.
Therefore you say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity subsides; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cephac lion which is at the proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus as a void, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, whether they be grassy and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, beware that you expose it and inquire into it at the beginning with a gentle instrument called an intro-mess, according to what its form will come in the chapter which is appropriate to this one.
And this is the manner of inquiry into swellings and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the swelling, and you rotate those things said with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the cord.
And accordingly, finally, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the swelling, and accordingly extract the intro-mess and consider what is situated in its track.
And if the humidity has flowed out, of whatever color it may be, then you will incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other swellings.
And if from the track of the intro-mess there is no humidity, then you know that it is grass.
And cut above it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Just as you have been taught, and suspend it with an oncus, and excoriate the cord of all parts with ease, and preserve the peel or sac, if possible, above it and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times there will be an opening above, and accordingly you will extract it by piecemeal until there is no longer any cause from it.
For if from it there remains no cause, little or much, the node will return to its original state.
And if you see that from it remains a small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause above it where the swelling is cautious, and cure it by another cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you will close the two lips of it and cure it with water that nourishes.
But if the pulsating vein is on the contrary, or non-pulsatile, then you will cut and hollow out the location of the three-fold wound that is filled with vitriol and leave it straight for two days or three until the wound becomes putrid and the ebullition of blood subsides; and accordingly return to incise what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the Forms of the Instruments Necessary in Section and Perforation.
Of those, the forms of intro-messes are three species, that some are great, and some medium, and some small.
The form of the great intro-mess is this:
The form of the small intro-mess is this:
They are made of iron, with a handle of wood or bone, and extremities curved decently, so that the instrument may be introduced into swellings.
And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are named by name, and one of them is called Berid.
And there are three species, that some are great, some medium, and some small.
The form of the great experimenter is this:
The form of the medium-sized experimenter is this:
The form of the small experimenter is this:
And thus it is fitting that they be for those swellings, excrescences, and fistulas, and buboes, because among them are those of bones and other causes.
And thus they are made rounded, thick, and lions, just like large needles with which the scales are sewn, and they are made of terra cotta, or iron, or silver, And the best ones are when they are made of terra citta.
And they are made by experimenters of black lead, which they agree that for those, the fistulas should be opened in the convergence of the reflections, which should be reflected into their lightness with those reflections.
And there are three species, that some of them are long, and others medium-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Form of the great experimenter of lead:
Form of the medium-sized experimenter of lead:
Form of the small experimenter of lead:
The forms of the onuses are many species, that some of them are simple, to which is only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
And among them are onuses of iron, and there are three species.
And among them are onuses that have two curvature, and there are three species.
And among them are onuses that have three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple onus, form of it:
Form of a great onus having two curvatures: Form of a medium-sized onus having two curvatures: Form of a small onus having two curvatures:
Form of a great onus having three curvatures:
Form of a medium-sized onus having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and swellings are cut and excised, and there are three species, that some are great, others medium-sized, and others small.
Form of a great scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and others not sharp, and are not so paused in such a way that it may be done jointly in the excision of nodes, so as to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and through these the patient may be healed and restored to tranquility, somewhat for the adjustment which finds fault with the excision of the swelling.
And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, just like veins.
They are made of terra cotta and resemble a ray with which alcohol is distilled.
And it has on the extremity a pierced point with a hidden spatula and in that corner there are partitions inside and outside, when you want, just as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the said parts of the perforation of swellings and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventoses with which the flow of blood is drained off, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; the forms are:
They are made of terra cotta, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
And it is necessary that you have these species of ventoses, great, medium-sized, and small, so that through them the flow of blood may be drained off with speed in need, and thus when your patient's condition is not yet medicated.
However, you do not use those to drain blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, just like in the armpits and groins, and in the armpits of the breasts, belly, and groin, and similar to their fleshy hummocks.
And some times they are made of those small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; through which the blood is drained when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of vein or artery.
And some times they are made rounded according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
Of the cure of the breasts of men which are assembled like those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflated just as they begin to be relaxed, and accordingly the breasts are swollen, and assembled like those of women, and apostemous, distant.
And to the one who has this condition, you should incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and accordingly excise the entire hardness, and accordingly fill the wound with flesh-colored medicine, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that until it is healed.
But if the breast descends to its natural parts and is softened by its own magnitude just like in women, then it should be cut into two halves with a slight surplus on each side, with two sections resembling the shape of the moon, where each one contains the end of the other, until the major line contains the minor one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And accordingly excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders that are necessary for healing until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which should be cut because of the anxiety of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive gall and leave it until the corrosion that remains from the grayish color has disappeared, and accordingly cure that until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the perforation of swellings that come from left behind the titillate.
Those swellings that come from left behind the titillate are of the species of scrofulas, which contain a sack.
And some of those contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the swelling, then you must fill it with old cotton and leave it for another day.
And accordingly the cotton should be left to stay and be cured with suitable gall, until it is healed.
And if the swelling is of the species of nodes or scrofulas, then you should cut into it just as we have said in the section on scrofulas, equally.
And if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it caustic according to what we have said before.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the section of swellings that occur by artery or vein.
When the artery is broken and the cord is consolidated which is above it, many times a swelling occurs And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and swelling are due to the artery or vein: for when the swelling is from the artery, it is long extended in the region of the chest; and when you apply pressure with those said things, you will feel in it what is called stridor.
And that which is from the vein is rounded to the visible part of the body.
And the section on this swelling is an error, and more so in those that are left behind the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be prevented.
But on that which is from the artery due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should cut into the cord in the long section; and accordingly cut the section with scissors and accordingly open up the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
And accordingly make an incision on that aglet and cause it to penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double thread in two places,  which is the reason why you should have your eye sight in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
And accordingly push the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is let out and the swelling is dissolved.
And accordingly administer treatment in which pus is generated until the ligaments fall apart; and accordingly cure that with suitable gall until it is healed.
And if the swelling is due to section of vein, then you should take with your hand as much of the swelling and cord as possible from the swelling and cord, and accordingly introduce the aglet behind the place where you have kept your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that file double so that you can extract what is on the other side, and accordingly bind the swelling with a single ligament just as I have told you to do with two parts and two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread may break, then accordingly introduce the thread with that aglet behind all the swelling before making the incision of the first needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
And accordingly cut the swelling in the middle of it so that when what is there is removed, you will then incise the surplus of the cord and leave what remains tied.
And accordingly put on the poultice which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and accordingly administer the treatment which is made with some and gall until it is healed.
Chapter LX of the swelling that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Just as swellings occur in the artery and vein, and similarly swellings occur in nerves when they are pierced or twisted excessively, and for similar reasons.
And it is caused by the greatest of all in the areas of the assistants or of the tibia, or in any place where the joints are affected.
And it is a grave swelling, and it is similar in color to the other body parts, and it occurs in the areas of greatest disposition for its formation and when it is stretched with great intensity, as if the patient were struck with stupor.
And it is not a swelling that is aggregated in the chest, and therefore it remains behind the cord, and it is affected to all parts and does not go to the anterior or posterior regions.
Therefore, what is in the joints should not be treated with iron, because it would cause too great a contraction.
But that which is in the head or forehead can be opened up with a spatula. But if it is a small swelling, then you should use the forceps and cut it off at the roots.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with scissors, and excise that part, and accordingly stop the bleeding; and adjust the wound with stitches, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXI.
Of the section of swelling which occurs in the cheek that occurs in the belly.
I have found in some men many times in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungous by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the top is thick; and already the lips of these are conversed, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is very magnificent.
And I myself have seen one, and in its belly there were two theils that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them in their white color, with very subtle roots.
And already the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it at all times.
Therefore, you should incise them and cut into the one in pieces of eighteen ounces. and the other piece weighs seven ounces.
And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider now if the patient is humid, and the color of their theil is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you should cut them open with a spatula, and have in your presence some caustic in the fire, because many times the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you find blood, cauterize that.
And if the patient is poor and timid, beware of incising with iron; but rather take a lead thread freshly made and strengthen it on that theil, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And accordingly adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on that theil, until it is cut off and falls away from its excessive labor.
But if the theil is of great roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and dread, and even more so in that which is in the belly.
But possible it is that you cut out most of it, and accordingly cauterize that so that it does not return.
And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to cut out a theil which is of dark color, with little sensation, and having no regard, for it is absolutely cancerous.
And I have found in my recollection a sign accordingly.
Chapter LXII.
Of the cure of prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is above the belly, and eyes of it are torn or burst forth according to what develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from vein or artery as has been said before, or by ventral constriction.
But if it is due to fissure of the cicatrix and bursting forth of the skin, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; and there is no great pain, but rather an appearance of diverse situations. And if it is due to protrusion of the budel, then the situation of that with water which we have recounted, and with more violent diversity, and as you press that with the said threads it is hidden, and accordingly returns; and very soon it becomes so, and is greatly magnified by the introduction of bath and intense labor.
But if due to humidity, then it is so loose and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or creased.
And if it is due to blood, then accordingly with these signs the swelling appears declining towards blackness.
But if it is due to nothing but flesh, then accordingly it is a great and large swelling, hard and firm, and fixed according to a quantity.
But if it is due to constriction, then accordingly the touch of it is loose.
And the operation in this case is that you consider now if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or constriction; accordingly it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because there is fear and dread just as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about swellings caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the budel or skin, then accordingly you should command the patient to hold his belly in one hand and be standing upright; and accordingly send someone with a tent in the circuit of all the navel, and accordingly command him to stand between your hands on either side of his belly, and accordingly circle with a spatula wide enough around the navel at the place you have marked with the tent; and accordingly extend most of the swelling towards the upper parts with scissors great; and accordingly tie it in the circuit with strong thread or with cord, and the manner of tying decent.
And accordingly make an incision in the middle of the swelling extended over the ligament and introduce the said thread into that indicated and seek out the budel; and if you have not found nor guarded it by the ligament, then you should extract the thread and push the budel towards the parts behind the belly.
And if you have found the skin, then accordingly take it with scissors; and cut out the excess parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly circle around that spot, and accordingly return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and enter two needles into the circuit which you have made around the swelling in a cross-like manner, which will make them penetrate; and accordingly strengthen the swelling in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the place until the flesh extended and falls away on its own; or cut it when it is softened and becomes pliable, and accordingly cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture in that place, then accordingly it is necessary for you to conquer the swelling as we have said and remove the blood or moisture which you find there, and accordingly cure that with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Chapter LXIII.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have already said in the division, about the kind of cancer and how it is to be cured with medicines, and that it is advisable not to use iron for its cure so as not to ulcerate; and we have also said that cancer is generated in the majority of cases through carelessness and caution in its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just like the cancer which is on the nipples or in the armpits and similar to those members allocated to remove all that, and most of all when it is beginning small.
But when it is old and great, it is not possible for you to take ownership of it, because you cannot heal from that place or disease, nor have I seen another way, nor one that has reached its end.
And the operation in this case is when it is allocated as we have said, which is that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black cholera several times, and accordingly bind up that part if it is found to be manifestly full.
And accordingly prepare the patient with preparation for the operation, and accordingly prohibit from entering the wound with scissors that are needed for that; and accordingly excavate all parts with a cord so good as possible excision, until there remains no cause for the roots of it. And let the blood flow, and do not cut too deeply, and remove the clots, and wash away the great deal of blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal among the instruments.
But if you find great opposition from the blood flow in an incision of a vein or artery, then accordingly cauterize that place until the bleeding has ceased, and accordingly cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the cure of dropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, about the kinds of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each kind, as well as the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not but the species of althitis alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypoarchae, for this is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of dropsy timpanistre with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then accordingly consider, for if the patient is already weakened or has another disease, such as in the lungs or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear is great over this.
But if you find the patient to be in good health, with no other disease but dropsy alone, and not young or old, then accordingly the manner of the operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give them appropriate medicine, and empty the belly of water with their own hand, filling the partition next to the pentenilh, and accordingly take a spatula with spines in this form:
to be of two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity just like a spatula; but however it should have some brief smallness little by little, in order that in the operation on that part you do not go too far into the belly and leave it there.
And accordingly consider if the generation of dropsy is from one of the bellies, for then it is necessary that you with the section go away from the navel by three times this distance to the parts left behind, on the right side of the belly over the pentenilh.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then accordingly your section should be on the left side of the navel by three times this distance.
And if the generation of it is due to the kidneys, then accordingly your section should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the side opposite to which the patient wishes to lie down, so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to that location.
And accordingly pierce the entire cord with an instrument, and accordingly enter into that section, and lift your hand with a spatula between the cord and the sphincter, and you excise that part; and if it is about the length of a fingernail or thereabout.
And accordingly pierce the sphincter until the spatula reaches the location where the water is. And accordingly extract that and enter an instrument which has this shape: and it is similar to a silver tube; it is made of silver or lead or bronze, at which in the lower part of the bottom is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut off according to the manner of a feather, just as you see:
And on the tip of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that ring will immediately be placed over the instrument, therefore evacuating from the water in the middle quantity, lest if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, soon the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or else you will cause them to faint and it is approaching death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of the virtue of it, and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's pulse and the goodness of it.
And accordingly extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it to be retained by the cord that holds the hole which is above the sphincter of which I have recounted to you that you should pierce it according to this manner.
And accordingly repeat the instrument to the other day if you find that the patient can tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do so for several days over fear, and beware of mistake until there remains only a little water.
But if you fear for the patient and leave a great quantity of water, then accordingly cure that with burial in hot sand, and moisten with bath, and wait under the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the kidneys and liver accordingly with the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted earlier.
Chapter LXV.
Of the cure of children who are born with undescended kidneys that do not perforate.
At times, one of the children is born from the womb of its mother and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or has a very narrow hole or is not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to perform an operation on the child as soon as it is born with a spatula that is very fine and subtle in this manner:
And accordingly pause in the hole a small lead clasp and tie it up, and let it stay for three days or four.
And when it wants to urinate be released and flow; and accordingly return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the place will not close this wound.
But that of which the hole is narrow should be treated with a lead clasp, just as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place are led astray, which cause is because of them, that one who is born and the tract is twisted is due to the end of the head of the scrotum so that it cannot urinate into the parts behind, until it lifts up the scrotum with its hand to the parts above; and it is not a generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a disease very grievous.
And the manner of the operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on his back, and accordingly extend the head of the scrotum with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and cut off the head of the head of the scrotum at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as one cuts off a feather or some part, so that the middle part of it becomes like the head of the scrotum, and the hole falls into the middle place according to what is necessary.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, for many times this happens; and pause at the place where you will cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Of the disease of which it occurs in the prepuce at the head of the scrotum, and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the scrotum.
Many times this disease occurs in the scrotum and is a prominence of soft flesh, very grievous.
And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, requires that you suspend it with a fine thread and cut off the part until all the excess is removed; and accordingly pause above the wound covered in Egyptian ointment; and accordingly treat it with ointment day by day until it is healed.
And if the disease is malignant, with dark color, then accordingly you should administer caustics around the incision and the edge of it.
But if the disease is in the prepuce of the head of the scrotum that is not circumcised, and one part of the disease is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then accordingly you should remove the diseased part that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and then you will cure that which is outside, for when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And thus also it occurs in the genitals and in the prepuce blackness and corruption, therefore you should conquer all that which is already corrupted and which already wishes to corrupt or has already been corrupted; and accordingly line over that with a mixture of honey and flour made from scoria of millet grain and well-crushed and well-sifted errors.
And accordingly cure that with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is excessive bleeding, then accordingly administer lunar caustics in this manner:
for lunar caustics are beneficial in two dispositions together, namely in bleeding and in the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the scrotum is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then accordingly you should insert a lead tube into the meatus of the prepuce, so that the patient may urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the scrotum (and this adhesion only occurs in one whose prepuce is thick and no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) you should excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the scrotum is freed from all part.
And if it is difficult to excise them precisely, then accordingly you should excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the scrotum and the prepuce, and thus is why the prepuce, when thin, is perforated by its own subtlety little by little.
And accordingly separate between the prepuce and the head of the scrotum with a thread of fine silk, which has been moistened in water so that they do not adhere to each other again.
And accordingly be treated with vinegar spirits until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
Of the purification of children and the treatment of that which occurs in them after circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but rather it is a part of our operation and our will, and its purpose is properly in children. It is necessary that we assign the best possible operation and way to proceed, losing no time for the sake of health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not dictate circumcision in any of their free books, for they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why you have found that most of the artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a razor and with fire; and they use a thread to bind and an incision to mark.
And I have already forbidden all these methods and did not find better purification with razors, with thread and fire that is like the mark of a finger, because many times the cord above has been cut off, since the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and the tone below remains, and it is soon forced to another incision and certain pain. And in purification made by the Alphatecians, which is digital, and used by the surgeons, it is not ensured that the incision of the extremity of the male member is secure, because soon it will enter into the tract of it.
But in the operation with a finger, iron soon causes obstruction and corrupts your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times they are born in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
But from the purification that is made with razors and threads and fire, I have discovered by experience that it is not good, for the razors are of proportionate incision, so that the sharpness above is as sharp as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally two sharpnesses, and inscribe them together in a single moment; and it is made a compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the scrotum on all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child as comfortable as possible, especially if it is one of those who understand little; and do not do more than simply tie the thread in its scrotum so tightly that it will not come undone until the next day.
And accordingly make the child happy in all that manner which is possible to you, according to how it receives its intelligence. And accordingly make the child sit between your hands most carefully prepared, and not be at all anxious; and conceal the razors in your hand or beneath your cloak, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And accordingly place your hand on the scrotum of him and blow into the cord, and pull it in until it is reached the head of the scrotum; and accordingly purify that which has accumulated there through impurities.
The form of the razors for purification, this is the form:
May the outer edges not be cutting and the other side be cutting, so that there is no space left at the tip of the claw, and may the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two arms equally.
But the error in purification is that soon you will cut away the entire inner cord or a part of it, which should be incised.
Therefore, I say that you should stretch that of your hour with your finger before the abscess of the wound and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then accordingly extract that with a thread and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the abscess has not burst open below the scrotum, then accordingly you should let it be until the abscess is fully formed, and excise that with ease, and incise that according to what is prepared for you.
And beware of the head of the scrotum, for it will not be affected by this.
And thus cure that with the powder that has been consolidated, according to the recipes that we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised according to measure, and obeys the parts above, this will not be noticeable.
And thus cure that with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
Of the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by a stone or by pressure or by congealed blood or by polyp or by fleshiness, and resembles those cases that we have described above in the division of methods for treating.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, the cause is vehement and made to affect the patient, then accordingly you should administer extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and very thin, like a quill pen, with a subtlety of length about a palm and a half, and at its tip should be a fine thread.
And the method of extracting urine with that is to take a double thread and tie it in the extremity of the lanolin or fat for good binding; and insert the extremities of the thread into the posterior part of the syringe, and inscribe with razors if there is any superfluous cause of the fat, but introduce it into the syringe with vehemence. And accordingly fill the syringe with border and album of hen.
And cause the patient to sit on a stool, and insert the syringe into his bladder and scrotum with olive oil and water.
And accordingly insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the scrotum; and accordingly double the scrotum above at the part of the navel; and accordingly push the syringe into that; and accordingly push that in until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be pervaded by the cause, and not made to go according to this order, but rather the way in which it goes to tortuosity.
And accordingly stretch the thread with the lanolin little by little, for the urine will absorb the lanolin.
And accordingly extract that and make it for urine cure, and use the syringe, do not cease to do so until the bladder is evacuated and the patient attains relief.
Chapter LIX.
Of the quality of catharticization of the bladder with celandine and similar instruments which are suitable for this.
When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or congealed blood is present in it, or the pungent juice is coagulated, and you want to make waters and medicines distill there, then accordingly use an instrument called celandine, and this is its form:
but in the extremity of it is deaf, that is to say, closed. And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like that times.
In the beginning it is a hollowed-out place, in which is contained the water that is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when some cause is pulled out by it from the humidities, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled long, the water is pulled out, as if it were a celandine, which is filled with naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to extract humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of celandine into the humidity, and pull out with it the water that is poured in above, because the humidity is pulled out into the hollow of celandine.
And accordingly insert the extremity of celandine into the scrotum according to what we have recounted in the syringe; and accordingly pour in the humidity with water that pours in, because that humidity will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
Form of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip most up is similar to a small feather, and below it has a thread-like canal.
And accordingly take the bladder in motion, and put into it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and accordingly tie that between two with a strong ligature of double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And accordingly insert the extremity of the catheter into the scrotum.
And accordingly stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity, and slowly descend into it until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present to you, then accordingly take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that all over its entire roundness; and accordingly insert a strong thread into those holes, so that they are revolved; and accordingly add the circle as it has been added before, so that you put in that which you want of humidities, oils, and waters.
And accordingly tie that in the instrument and make it as you have made it with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
Of the extraction of stones.
We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the lungs and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of these.
And we have said that stone which catches operation with my hands and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is formed in the bladder.
And you show it with a clear and brief explanation.
And I say that the stone generated in the bladder is most common among children; and one of its signs is that the urine that flows from the bladder is similar to water in subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels his scrotum, and many times pain, and accordingly is dressed; and with this, you will find the anus full of those.
And it is easier to cure children of that until they have reached the age of 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. But in young people it is more common because it is between them.
And of that from which the stone is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
And therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at first to purify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the crack that is in his veins; for that crack sometimes hinders the formation of the stone and makes it difficult to detect.
And accordingly, the patient should be placed on his knees and supported by assistants for such a reason that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or else jump from one place to another at times.
And accordingly, make the patient sit between your hands that are prepared, and the things of him should be left aside, for such reason that the bladder may be made to decline towards the posterior parts.
And accordingly, make sure that everything is done outside.
So if you feel the stone in space, then accordingly you should sit down quickly with section on him.
And if you do not catch the stone completely, then accordingly it is necessary that you anoint with oil your right hand indicated by your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if he is a young adult, and insert that into his anus. And accordingly, extract the stone until it comes out of your right hand. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And accordingly press upon it with your right hand and push that out to the posterior parts outside the location where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with her right hand; and command another assistant to extend her left hand upwards towards the posterior parts, and with her other hand to hold the cord which is below the genitourinary area, in the location where the incision is being made.
And accordingly insert the spatula which is incident of this form: And accordingly insert the spatula which is incident of this form: and cut into it that which is between the anus and the genitourinary area, not in the middle location, but rather before the left side of the cleft; and make the incision on that stone and your right hand be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and straight as possible according to the amount that you have extracted from the stone, and not greater, for fear that the stone may be compressed by your right hand which is in the anus, and it will be forgotten without difficulty.
And know that from the stone some parts are angled and rough, for which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And from that water there comes forth something resembling a small glass, and it is rounded, and it makes the extraction of it easier.
So if it is one with angles and roughness, adjust it in the cleft.
And if it is not so, then accordingly you should press upon it, or stretch upon it with decent gestures, the extremity of which is like a file upon which you press upon the stone, and do not let it escape from there; or that you insert below it a subtle instrument with curved extremity.
But if you cannot press upon it, then accordingly you should widen the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it with great strength using vitriol mixed with vinegar.
But if the stone is larger than one, then accordingly at first you should push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and inscribe upon it; and accordingly push a little further away; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then accordingly ignorance is that you inscribe it with a great incision, for two things will happen to the patient: either he will die or he will be afflicted with continuous urination, and therefore the location will not be fully consolidated.
But administer expulsion from there until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture of it with razors until that stone is extracted in pieces.
And therefore, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosated oil and water, for such reason that the abscess may be calmed.
And accordingly repose the patient on his back, and do not release the bandage for three days.
And when you have released that, dress the wound with water and much oil, and accordingly cure it with diaphrenic ointment and diabasilic ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is hot, swollen, and corrosive, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and by this means the urine is prevented (and this is known through the egression of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your right hand into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
And accordingly wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, with what is suitable for the cure until it is healed.
And accordingly in all the hours of the cure, you should lie down and adjust the medicines that are paused over the wound.
And if the stone is small and is in the midst of the scrotum, and it is fixed there, and urine flow is prohibited, then accordingly cure that with what you have recommended before you proceed to section, for many times this cure is accused of being a section; and now I have already tried that, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron alfelut, of which this is the form:
of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
And accordingly take a thread, and tie it around the scrotum below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And accordingly insert the iron into the scrotum, piercing with ease until the perforator comes out to that stone. And accordingly turn the perforator with your hand in that stone little by little, and you pierce the perforation of it until you make it pass to the other side penetrate; for soon after the urine is released.
And accordingly press your hand on the part of the stone that remains outside the scrotum, because it is stuck, and it is forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you by any cause that prohibits it, then accordingly tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. And accordingly inscribe upon the stone in that scrotum between two ligatures. And accordingly extract that. And accordingly release the ligature and purify the congealed blood which is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the stone, except that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is released near the extraction of the stone, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you when you have tied the thread above, that you lift the cord to the upper parts, or else return with your right hand and close the wound just as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
Of the Extraction of Stone in Women.
Stone in women is rarely generated.
But if one does see stone in some of them, then accordingly the cure is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of those reasons is that the woman herself is very stubborn.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to behave herself well when she meets with a doctor, or is one of those women who have husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
And the fourth reason is that the location of the section on stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a prolonged section, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity demands it of you to this, then accordingly it is necessary that you take a woman who is well-behaved and not easily frightened.
But if you are deprived of that, then accordingly look for a woman who is quick and subtle, or present a mature woman well-experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has made progress in this art.
Therefore present that, and command it to do all that you will tell it, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that it should see if the woman is a virgin, then accordingly place your right hand in her anus and seek out the stone.
Therefore if you find it, cut it below your right hand, and then command it to inscribe upon that.
But if she is not a virgin, then accordingly command the matron to insert her right hand into the private parts of the patient and inquire about the stone, since she will place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with good compression.
Therefore if you find it, then accordingly gradually massage that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the summit of her virtue until it reaches the root of the scrotum.
And accordingly inscribe upon that apposition of the might of the private parts to the root of the scrotum of some part that is located and centered on the stone, and the right hand not be removed from the stone, cut below it.
And the section should be small at first; and accordingly insert the forceps onto that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you know will cause the stone to be extracted from there.
And know that the types of stones are many: for some are small and large, and smooth and rough, and long and rounded, and having ridges.
Therefore you know how many types there are of it by this which you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the place vitriol mixed with vinegar and stay there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
And make sure that you prepare with your own the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the wound that is inscribed, then accordingly you will pause powder on the location and strengthen it with powders and strictures descending, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient will soon die. And accordingly cure the wound.
And therefore when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location is settled, then accordingly you return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
Chapter LXII.
Of Section on Hernia in the Groin.
Hernia in the groin is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac which is below the cord of the testicles containing the liquor, and it is called a sac.
And some times it is in the proper fold of fat which nature has prepared in the part of the liquor, until it becomes another liquor; and it is the cord of the testicles between the white sac which we have said, and not this but rather a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the testicles, because it flows into these testicles this material, and sometimes it occurs through blows made on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it is either declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or blackish, or white watery, and it is that which is most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: for if it is in the white sac which we have said, then the abscess is rounded declining a little to length like the figure of a liquor, and appears the testicle, because the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper fold of fat, then the abscess is rounded with the part of the liquor and thus one estimates that it is another liquor.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the testicles and the white sac, then a swelling appears below the sensation.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then accordingly you will inspect the color of the moisture in the abscess by entering through a channel from which the shape is preceded; and according to what it appears in the vestige of the entrance, judge from that what it is.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then accordingly you must command the patient to be flaccid if that is possible for you, and sometimes fill his body.
And accordingly it should be raised up on the patient's back for some reason a little higher, and pause below him many cloths.
And accordingly sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of him, which will extend his hand to one of two sides to the cord of the testicles and the part of the navel of the belly.
And accordingly take a spatula and divide the cord of the testicles from the middle location by length, so that it is close to the navel.
And accordingly make the section according to straight line evenly distant from the line that should be drawn on the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white sac containing.
And accordingly excise that, observe, and be careful not to inscribe it; and your excision with which you excise that part below, as if it were suspended in the liquor more subtly explores the excision according to the quantity that is possible for you.
And accordingly pierce the white sac full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And accordingly separate between the two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the sac to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the testicles that contains it, and inscribe the sac in that manner which is possible for you. And accordingly inscribe that with its entire totality or in parts, and most particularly the subtle sides, for if you do not scrutinize the inscription of it extremely well, there is no sure guarantee that the water will not return.
But if the liquor proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the sac, return inside it, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the testicles with a suture, and accordingly cure that just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the liquor corrupted by another disease, then accordingly you should open the vessels which are sore the suspensors, and extract the liquor, and accordingly cure that with what we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore inscribe that part according to what you have done with the other equally; and if it appears to be one operation, then you will do it.
And accordingly you will wash the blood away, and enter into the sections lamb submerged in oil or rosy oil; and pause outside another lamb which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two testicles and the navel of the belly; and pause above folded cloths and powders, and tie those above with a ligament according to this form:
and accordingly two cloths are pressed and filled with Carmelite wool according to this likeness; and the extremities are made with those that are wrapped in a cloth or wet wool, and are added to the structure in the breeches of the trousers, and one of the extremities takes from the backside into the crotch, and the second takes to the part of the navel, and two other extremities above two wounds below, and two other extremities above two abscesses; and all the structure is adjusted in the breeches of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauter in place of section with iron; and it's that you take a cauterous cutlery subtle and inscribe it on the cord of the testicles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white sac containing the water is uncovered, and then you take the cauter according to this form: and it's assembled in Greek letters.
And accordingly pierce through that sac, and is ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
And accordingly extend the sac with hooks, and excise with hooks, and excise with a burning cauterous cutlery; and inscribe that according to what is possible for you until it is eradicated entirely; and be careful not to let the liquor touch the fire.
And know that this operation is more safe and less prolonged with bleeding, and better than the operation of section.
But if you encounter opposition, such as abscess during the time of section or cauterization, or bleeding, then accordingly you should take care to cure whatever opposition arises for you by that means, with the treatment which is suitable for him according to what is said.
But if the patient is timid and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then accordingly administer perforation according to what we have recommended above; and it is when you are certain, by virtue of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
And accordingly you should make the patient sit on some elevated elevation, and pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And accordingly be the aperture wide enough that it drains all the water.
And accordingly pause above the location of the cut and tie that off, in order that the remaining water flows out. And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
But if opposition is to the flow of water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for that reason, because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound causes opposition and prevents the ejection of the water; then accordingly you should put a penalty or instrument into the wound with which the water is extracted from the dropsies, the form of which is preceded; or adjust a small piece in the opposite part of the wound.
And know that the water returns, and is again accumulated in about two months or a year after; and when it is accumulated, then accordingly be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Of Section on Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of losing one's life through perilous dispositions; for which reason it has been seen by me, to dismiss him and be saved through better means.
And you are reminded of the operation on that and the species of abscesses.
Therefore I say that abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose testicles are composed and it is made so for many reasons: or by sudden acute superfluity, which is poured into the testicles, or by blows.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And very often it is a pustular abscess, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in him.
And sometimes it is made by the obstruction of arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels as well as that which is remembered of him, or by inflammation of veins.
But that which is due to inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with those said ties; and it is not necessary for it to touch.
But that which is due to inflammation of veins is not dispersed from him for any reason, even with compression by those said ties.
And it is possible that on this species a section be made and on the other flesh; and it's that you inscribe the cord of the testicles, and accordingly extend the liquor to the upper parts, and extract that from the white sac, and deliver the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them up, and inscribe the suspensor more than you deliver that from all part of the liquors.
Therefore if the liquor is already consolidated in those fleshed parts, then accordingly you should extract the liquor and inscribe that.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the sac or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly you should deliver all that adhesion and inscribe it with a rounded incision.
But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then accordingly you should inscribe all that is from him, and extract the liquor just as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then accordingly fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and accordingly cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the Cure of Hernia that is of Veins.
Veins is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud in the softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to exercise movement and walking.
And in the cure of this disease it is due to fear because of which the preceding memory is recalled.
However, I must say that the operation on that should be done according to what was done by the first ones.
And I say that you should make the patient sit on an elevated elevation; and accordingly grasp the suspensors of the testicles at the left side; and accordingly tie the cord of the testicles with those said ties around the vessels which are proved to be in the sac; and have another assistant besides you, and extend them with a vehement extension.
And accordingly inscribe with a spatula flat for a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
And accordingly excise from all parts just as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And accordingly put an awl in those with a double thread, and tie that in the first of the places where the veins occur, and tie it again on another occasion at the last of them. And accordingly inscribe those in the middle location by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated with foul and corrupted humors.
And accordingly cure the wound with treatment of other wounds in which you wish to bring forth healing because those vessels will not nourish one of two testicles, for it is not bad for that reason.
But if the veins are injured in all vessels, then accordingly it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be cut off along with the vessels, so that it may be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and thus be destroyed, or cut off because it will not be well with those.
Chapter LXV.
On the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
The advent of this hernia is due to a section that proceeds in the sac extended over the belly on the side of the navel of the belly, so that by bursting open the bags of that rupture they come out into some of the bags.
And this rupture is either of the sac or of excrescence from it, and occurs in these two species for many reasons: or by blows, or by salt, or by noise, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by likenesses.
And the sign of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess growing equal to the prepuce on account of which the sac fills the bag.
And the sign of this is when it occurs by section of the sac, for at first it causes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an abscess that appears different from the cord that has been torn apart, and this is due to the ejection of the bag, and the body of it in the parts outside the sac.
And sometimes it is forgotten with the bag's skin, and this is called intestinal hernia cirrhal.
And sometimes it is made with distension, and sometimes it runs in the bag's fissure, and there it is retained, and this is very great perniciousness for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and mostly when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the accident in that.
And the manner of the operation on that is that you command the patient to draw out the bag with his own hand towards the parts outside of his conquest if he obeys his returnment, and accordingly be seated over his back between your arms, and lift up the legs of him.
And accordingly tie the cord which ties the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and inscribe the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly place it in two lips of the section hooks according as you need to open the section with those.
And if the section is done according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget from that, the liquor may be forgotten.
And accordingly excise those sac-like things which are left over the cord of the testicles, until the white hard sac is uncovered in each part.
And accordingly insert the tie you said in that which secures the testicle, in that which is between the white sac and the sac, the latter being left over the cord of the liquor, and between the sac, and absolve with that adherence which is in the part behind the liquor.
And accordingly take hold of the cord of the testicles with your left hand, and extend the white sac in that direction with your right hand, and raise the liquor to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the liquor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
And search for those said ties which may not be any cause of the bag being wrapped in the white hard sac. But if you find some cause from him, then accordingly you should tie that to the belly below.
And accordingly inscribe in the part left over from the cord of the testicles by section, which will bleed and heal just as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And accordingly administer wool soaked in oil, and pause on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white sac is cauterized, which we have said should be done for fear of bleeding, because many times it occurs) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
But if the bleeding is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be applied, and pause on it until it falls according to what we have said.
And accordingly cure the wound with another treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, it is not seen that anyone has been bold enough to attempt the cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; the one which you tie the vessels accordingly to the section on that with facility of iron; and accordingly cut off in the middle location around the abscess with this which causes that, until the vessels come forth.
And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the Disproportion that is made in the Navels.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the navels just as we have said, and protrude the location.
And there is not any cause for the testicles in the testicles; and if there is, it is little; and returns back to all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is an adjustment of a fissure in the sac until it descends into the sac; and it occurs because of the extension of the sac which is in the navels just as we have said, which cause is that the sac is stretched, and accordingly becomes softened and the location abscesses and protrudes.
And the cure of this is with a cauterization just as we have previously described it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your arms, and accordingly cuts off the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding through section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
And accordingly strengthen the white sac that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
And accordingly take a reed and pause it on the protruding location of the sac, and press it against the belly's front.
And accordingly bring together the two protruding locations on the extremity of the reed of the sac, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And accordingly extract the extremity of the reed, and do not inscribe the sac entirely, nor extend the liquor, nor any other cause just as you wish to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And accordingly cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you inscribe the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the sac has contracted and the prominence of rupture has not been adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, because it is more conducive to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between it is softened, and it is fitting for that to be observed.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is engaged in the cure of this to make the patient lie on his back between your arms, and inscribe all the softened cord which has been softened over the natural cord; and accordingly bring together two lips with a suture.
And if you wish, remove in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
And accordingly inscribe between the sutures; and accordingly cure through the treatment of other wounds until it is healed and the threads come forth.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is allowed to me to remember of it in this book; and there is no need for the remembrance of it except for two manners, one of which is because of what I know about the science of the physician when he is required to cure of that which occurs; and the other manner is that we many times have needed castration of other beasts for our uses through those, just as with mares, oxen, and pigs, and similar to cattle.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: either by castration, or by incision at section.
But in that which is done by castration, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hang. And accordingly take those with your hand into which they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind by the touch.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And accordingly tie the suspenders, and inscribe on each liquor with one section until two liquors process.
And accordingly inscribe those more than you will have excised. And do not leave on those any cause from the sac, but only the subtle sac which is over the veins.
And this manner of castration is better which is done by castration, because castration leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast does not desire to copulate.
And accordingly cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the Cure of Hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites in men are according to two manners: one is when there appears in that which is the space in the cord of testicles, between two testicles a figure as if a female were in it, with breasts.
And sometimes from that there comes urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
But in women it is one species: and it is that the female's vulva on the pubis is as if two male testicles, with only a small part of the outer skin resembling the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women. And it is that you need to inscribe those adjusted flesh into which the pressure of that one is escaped, and accordingly cure those with the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine comes that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On Lumps and Flesh that protrudes due to causes of women.
Lump is very little adjusted over natural causes until it is estranged and made to be a legible sign; and sometimes it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it spreads just like in men, and extends as far as to the act of copulation.
Therefore it is necessary that you take the excess lumpiness with your hand or with a tool and inscribe.
And do not stop until you have inscribed, especially in the belly of the rational part, so that it may not engender a flow of blood.
And accordingly cure that with the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the womb until it fills it, and very little is emitted to the outer parts according to the shape of a tail (and therefore we will also call this one "malautia caudata"); therefore it is necessary that we inscribe as we inscribe lumpiness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the Cure of Rickets.
Rickets is when the female's vulva is not perforated, or if it is pierced with a small hole. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease which has preceded, and that is caused either by flesh not properly adjusted or by subtle or thick sac.
And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or in the ribs of the child, or in the topmost part of the child, or in the lowest part of the child, and prohibits coition, pregnancy, and childbirth, and very little prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observing the pulse of the metrona, if the obstruction is apparent, palpable; but if it is not apparent, then you must search for it with the fingers or with a reed.
But if obstruction is due to subtle sac, and is palpable in the two lips, then you must cut and disrupt that.
And it is that you pause on the two lips of the pulse, and accordingly pause the fingers on both sides simultaneously.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs extended, and accordingly stretch out the two lips with force until that subtle sac is broken and the obstruction is open.
And accordingly take wool and wet it with oil and pause that on the location, and make the patient lie down at home for a day in order that the inscribed location may not be consolidated.
But if the sac is large and thick, it is necessary that you inscribe that with lard or with myrtle leaves.
But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then suspend it with a tool and inscribe that.
And you will have medicines that cause the blood to cease flowing without scratching, such as hiccups, dragon's blood, and gallbladder, adjusted with album of egg.
And accordingly administer a leaden catheter wide enough to prevent the wound from being consolidated slightly.
And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
And accordingly be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural birth of other flesh, and accordingly it is necessary to inscribe according to this manner. But if it is due to gangrenous abscess, then let there be no contradiction with iron in any manner against the gangrenous abscess that is in the mother.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the Cure of Hemorrhoids, Tail, and Red Bottom that occurs in the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the outlets of many veins, until those veins flow continuously with blood; and as old hemorrhoids become, they form excrescences.
And now I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and will say also which ones receive cure and which ones do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and excrescences when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those there should not be made cure with iron.
But those which are in the outlet of the mother and on which one can sense something, are those which are cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and accordingly stretch out her excrescence with forceps or with rough cloth, and inscribe those on the roots.
And accordingly powder is to be spread over those with the flows of blood from one of the inscribed powders without scratching, such as ash tree and similar to those.
And accordingly press her feet with your own for an hour, and accordingly pause that in cold water.
And if the blood flows persistently, then let that be stopped in a decoction of sumac and scorched mulberries and gauls and similar things.
And accordingly take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make an poultice with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is absolved, it is good; and otherwise, let it adhere to two poultices, and on the nipples without scarification.
And accordingly take wool and submerge it in the juice of colicandra or in the juice of Arnagluz or in the juice of Gurravera with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and accordingly cure the location with a poultice until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the Perforation of Accidental Hernia in the Mother.
Many species of accidental hernias occur in the mother, such as gangrenous and lapidary abscesses, ulcers, adhesions, herpes, hemorrhoids, and red bottoms, and other abscesses. And now I have said these illnesses and the species of those and their signs, and the cures for them in the division.
And it is necessary that you say in this treatise on gangrenous abscesses which occur in the mother when they are among those that can be cured, and if you wish to know how the operation is done with iron.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the gangrenous abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and if it becomes more inflamed and if there is a sensation on it, then do not cut with perforation, and cure that with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident ceases.
And accordingly it is necessary that you make the woman lie on a bed with two pillows; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet to the part most distant from the belly, and her legs be expanded, and pause her arms below her knuckles, and tie each one with a ligation suitable for water.
And accordingly the midwife will follow the right hand and administer the instrument with which the outlet of the mother is opened, in the form that will come about in those causes that are to be done accordingly.
And accordingly when you wish to administer this instrument, you must make it with a reed the womb of the mother of the woman, and that which is entered into the mother's womb should not be more than the mother's womb and lead the patient. But if the instrument is greater than the womb of the mother, then it is necessary that you powder with powder on the texture of the womb of the mother so that it may be prohibited for any instrument to enter into the womb of the mother.
And accordingly it is necessary that you pause the turning that runs in the instrument from the right hand and above, and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the handle until the outlet of the mother's womb is opened.
And when the excitation appears, and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you stopper that with the head of it with lard.
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you pause in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil which has some purgative properties; and pause the pressure in the section within the womb of the mother.
And pause outside the mother, and on the pentinent wool clean, submerged in water in which blueberries have been boiled.
And accordingly it is cured within two days with an ointment that corresponds to the condition until it is healed.
And sometimes the mother is washed and the wound is cleansed in this way that it is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly with water in which rye or long aristology has been boiled, and accordingly returns to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the mother's flesh, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from curing it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner the living beings should be medicated when they are sick according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should know in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and this is because when you see the woman expelling at the partings and desires to smell the air, and on top of that she is lifted by what is above her part, and hastens the exit of the living being, then you will understand that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the exit of the child over its head, and the second birth with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Therefore, since you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the child be compressed in order that the living being may descend slightly when they are on its head, and then give birth to the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
But that which is another this part is non-natural and not to be tolerated, because when the living being is born on its feet and the body of it is born before its head and its feet, and one hand or at the foot .i., or is born the head of it and one hand or at the belly of it, and very little is turned over its neck, and similar to the figures that are non-tolerable.
Therefore, it is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to beware of error and deception.
And you will show the entire figure of those, and which art is in them so that it may be signified by that and has been established on top.
When the child is born on its head by natural expulsion, and that is violent against the woman and is made a difficult part, and times the virtue of it already debilitated, then let that be stopped, or what women have in them, and evaporate the vulva with fenugreek cooked and with sweet olive oil.
And accordingly let the metrona enter between the two said spatula and slit with that which is the second birth, or cut it with its own nail until it runs through what is in it of humidity. And press the belly of the woman until it descends the afterbirth.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a poultice of papyrus and a poultice of fenugreek with camomile.
And accordingly command it to be compressed and make that afterbirth snore with condensation; and tie the mouth of it and the nose of it for one hour, because the afterbirth will soon be forgotten.
And if the two more of the afterbirth are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce those with small ease little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then let the woman be paused on a bed and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the bed on the earth; and the woman is to be held so that she may not fall with the concussion.
And if the afterbirth is not returned and the child dies, then let those be inscribed and extract the remains of the child or tie its body to the hand with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
When the child is born over its feet, then it is necessary that you push those in, and accordingly transform the small child, and accordingly make it equal, and accordingly take one foot of it and stretch those little by little.
But when they are born into the legs, then it is necessary that you command them to exit, and make that afterbirth snore with condensation, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you must return the small child little by little until it pauses in the second figure of nature, because that will soon be forgotten with a lighter exit.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take a poultice of altor and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and accordingly line it with water on the vulva of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly. And accordingly make that poultice cease in warm water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when the parts that are left of it are relaxed, then make it sub-fumigate with myrtle and sub-pause it for. And when the sub-fumigation has taken place for one hour, then make it cease on a bed, and accordingly make that afterbirth snore and stretch out its mouth, and take away from that, and press the lowest part of her belly with gentle compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Exit of the Child laterally hanging from one of its toes. Be entwined in the reduction of the hand of it, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift the woman and make her go.
And if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the lyre, and pound her legs with strong concussion, and accordingly administer those which I have recounted as poultices.
And if the childbearing is done, then make her cease on a bed, and accordingly study on the reduction of the hand, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make the woman snore and command it to compress itself until it is forgotten.
Exit of the Child over its neck, with its toes expanded and the fold of it at the two sides of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife take the hand of the child and accordingly revolve it little by little, and make it easy.
And when it is equalized and as much as is equalized, then pause on the vulva of her that which we have recounted of oil and poultices.
And accordingly command it to be compressed little by little, and when you have done that, then make her cease on a bed and command it to be inclined over the right side, and accordingly command it to be compressed; and make it snore with condensation. Exit of the prepared fetus onto its side.
When it is delivered to the horror of the mother in this manner, consider, and accordingly you inscribe the afterbirth with your nail until it is evacuated of its humidity.
And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you must inscribe that from the navel, for so that it may not be retained and die.
And accordingly push the child into the afterbirth until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and if God so wills, it will soon be forgotten with a lighter exit.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that sometimes twins are born, and some times three or four, but this is strange and does not befit nature; but five causes are natural, and none live.
And in those cases, whether they are multiplied or not, one afterbirth, and they are separated by a ciphac, distinguish each from the others within the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten thus as if it were one child born naturally with a lighter exit, and sometimes they are born with an unnatural exit just as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and persevere until they reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then you must cure those just as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and in delay, and is ingenious according to all figure, according to what is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and those that are aborted.
Certain ages are formed in the mother's womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten, and you should verify with me that a woman aborts at the sixth or tenth stage, while another may have all of them formed, which is caused by measurement according to the wise and glorious.
And all this must be in the science of the midwife because very little is like that to her, and therefore pause at that with such as is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the Extraction of the Fetus when it is Dead.
When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not born outside, and you are forced to use an operation on her, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has a sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents for which upon her there is feared destruction.
Then it is necessary that the woman be elevated on the lyre over her backside, and have her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the minister should hold that with two parts or be tied to the lyre in such a way that the body of it does not extend excessively during the extraction of the fetus.
And accordingly, you should moisten the mouth of her with oil and sweet olive oil and poultice of altor and fenugreek and seed of lily.
And accordingly, the midwife should take her hand with those oils and poultices, and accordingly entwine her hand with ease in the mother, and accordingly search for the precise location where the nails are stuck to the fetus.
And find the suitable location there: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and accordingly fix the nails in the hollows of it, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of it, or in the appropriate places on the chest, or below the hypochondria.
But if the descent is onto the feet of it, then in the pubis, or in the middle of the chest.
And it is necessary to hold the nail with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and entwine the hand with ease and fix the nail in some of those locations which we have said, until one reaches the cause of the boyd.
And accordingly, pause and fix in the apposition of it another nail or the third if necessary, for so that there may be an equal attraction, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
And thus it is good for all parts, for so that the exit of it may be alleviated just as it is done in the way of the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in that which is between them for the extension to be mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife take certain fingers with oil and entwine those expertly and revolve with what is retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails should be permitted to enter that location where it is more uppermost; and do so until all the fetus is forgotten.
But if the hand is gone before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around that; and accordingly extract that until all is forgotten, and inscribe that either in the juncture of the hand or in the armpit.
And thus it is necessary to do the same for the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is contriction in the exit, or if there is water adjusted in the head of it, then it is necessary that the midwife entwine between the fingers the spatula with spines and split the head and extract the water, or that she dissects that with a instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come from the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And similarly do so if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary that you inscribe that with an algemate, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is extracted and constricted at the furcula, then it should be split open until the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
But if it is not complicated, nor obeys the exit, then you should inscribe the head at once according to what is possible for you.
And if the remaining part of the belly is apostemated or is in a liquid state, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the humidity which is in it runs out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is light and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is light.
But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then it is necessary that you extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and that you split open the belly and feet until the water which is in them runs out.
But if the other members are still and return to the head, then take it with your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your hand into the preeon of layre, and seek out that head, and draw it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and accordingly entwine in it one nail, or two nails, and pull it with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an apostemal swelling that occurs in it, then it is necessary not to trouble about it; instead, it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid and greasy causes. And minister plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its own chest, then it is necessary to pierce it as much as possible; and administer water that we have said for the living fetus.
And if this is not possible, then it is necessary to inscribe in membranes, and extract.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause behind the afterbirth.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer water that we have said for the cure of apostemal swellings which occur in the mother.
And if there occurs a flow of blood, then you should descend into stiptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and accordingly above that same focus another pregnancy begun, and accordingly dead heat is the other fetus. An accident befell me at a long time ago, an apostemal swelling in my own navel; and it swelled up to the point of being like a hot fever, and I began to discharge pus.
And you were summoned to his cure, and treated him for a long time, and the wound did not consolidate.
Then I applied to him some plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing certain days, I extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there should not be bones.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore I dressed the wound, and extracted from him several bones, the woman existing in her own milk-disposing vessels, and already living in such a way for a long time, corrected by him a small amount of pus.
And I did not consider it strange, but rather because in that is science and assistance to that which the physician artist administers with his hand for cure.
On the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a veritable uterus, in which is opened the mother:
This is the form of strength in which are equalized the liberties, to which equalization are two virtues at two extremities of two feet. But however this virtue must be more subtle in the strictor, and made of ebony or of boxwood.
And the latitude of each foot is two fingers and the edge of both feet is one finger; and the longitude of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle location between the two woods are two adjustments of those very woods which are already fixed, the length of which is almost equal to one palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two adjustments are entwined in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to them when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
It is made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of forceps. But however in the extremity of it there are two adjustments like times, and the length of those adjustments is one palm, and the latitude of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those, then you must cause the woman to cease sitting on the lyre, and let her feet hang down, so that what is between her thighs may be opened. And accordingly work with your hand on the instrument just as you would with forceps equalization according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until she makes it in the way that you want.
The form of uterus which they called the ancients:
Form of impulsion, in which the fetus is propelled.
Form of amenorrhea, in which the large head is contained.
And it is assembled with forceps which have teeth at the end, like times, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, which has teeth like teeth of a reaping hook with which it is inscribed and contained. Form of amenorrhea little:
Form of nail having a spine:
Form of nail having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities at which the head is cut off:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied and prepared, the artisans must be as skilled in their operation and as expert as they can be, for it is easier to perform their operation.
And you must not neglect those instruments in any way, for the necessity of them is irrepressible.
On the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you order the patient to strain her own belly, and accordingly make her fart with conditions, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of her and on her nostrils, and if through this it has come out, all is well.
And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate it in the covering of a wound and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, like calamus, rough thistle, anise, camomile, Arabic balm, cassia lignea, and St. John's Wort. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and then pause it on the fire.
And accordingly, place a reed cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
And accordingly, make her fart as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed.
But if the cure does not take effect and the afterbirth remains, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in an emulsion of aloes, and accordingly entwine it with a cord and seek out the afterbirth, and when you find it, then take it and stretch it little by little. But if it is attached in the womb of the mother, then entwine your hand as we have recounted, and when you find the afterbirth, extract it slowly and carefully so that the mother does not suffocate from the vehement attraction. Above all, it is necessary to be skilled on both right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with farting and medication of the cloth with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then be careful that you do not tire over it in iteration of abstraction, but rather let what has come out from it to the mouth of the mother lie in the vagina of the woman, and accordingly encrust it with a poultice and tetra-pharmacopoeia; for that will make it rot away slowly and dissolve and be expelled.
But when it rots, it is elevated to bad authority in the head and stomach, and accordingly leads the patient into suffering; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered according to this.
But some of the Ancients have already been experimented with sub-fumigation of hazelnuts and dried figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated in order to retain menstruation and afterbirth:
It is made of yew or horn.
And it is paused with the subtle extremity in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused over the arms of the fire.
And keep that in until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate with another.
On the cure of the unbroken navel of the child.
Many children are born with navels that are not perforated, which already have a subtle and opaque cicatrice. Then have the midwife pierce with her own finger that cicatrice; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the lactation.
And accordingly, place on that a layer of lanolin infused in wine and oil; and accordingly cure it with a poultice until it is healed.
But if you fear that it may be opilated, then place a reed cane in the wound for several days, and stop when the child will desire to defecate.
And if there occurs an opilation of the navel due to consolidation of wound or apostemal swelling; then it is necessary that this consolidation be inscribed, and accordingly cured with the water we have said for the cure and lead.
On the cure of fistulas that were left over.
The fistulas which remain after the departure, being lower down in the navel and thicker than those which are located near the anus outside or in the space of one part.
And it is a single fistula or several.
And since this nodule is aged and flows with white or subtle pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And those that are penetrating are known by what comes out of them through the egress and windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and very little comes out from those vermin.
And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space between the bladder and the urethra, and into the glans of the penis; and some also penetrate into the junction of the vagina and into the notch of the clitoris.
And the way to know if a fistula is penetrating into the anus or not-penetrating, is that you insert your finger into the anus and entwine a subtle thread of horn or iron in the fistula when there is no turbulence.
But if there is turbulence in that, then you insert into it a subtle thread of lead or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair in your finger.
And if you don't feel that at all or there is no process of the tract at all nor any cause of egestion, vermin, or windiness, as we have said, then you know it is not-penetrating, and accordingly turn to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the glans of the penis, then the significance of it is to be cleansed with urine from that place and prohibition of further passage so that the location may be consolidated through medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vagina or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread will pass through here if there is no turbulence in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from here there is pus everywhere; and that it does not hold with medicine, nor is it consolidated by poultice.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of these is the toil and vanity of foolish physicians who are fixed.
But in that which is not penetrating and not aged, the healing with iron is expected according to what you have recounted, and what has been tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your thighs over his own back and raises his knees to yours, so that the woman's legs are inclined towards her belly, and accordingly you insert a thread of lead or horn into the fistula if there is turbulence, until you know the place where the thread passes.
And if that patient feels pain around the navel, then you must insert your finger into the navel.
And if you feel the thread already inserted and having passed through, or between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and accordingly do not intervene in that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
But however, some may say that it is healed in some men's hearts.
And the medicine by which healing is expected in that place is that you ignite a subtle cauter, according to the size of the fistula, just as it has been preceded, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it comes around the navel; and accordingly iterate that two or three times until you know that all those fleshed-adjusted fistulas that are like reeds of swan's plumage have become adjusted.
And accordingly, cure that with cloth wraps in butter until all those adjusted fleshed-adjusted fistulas are healed; and accordingly, cure that with medicines promoting and consolidating the skin, and if it is healed, well; and otherwise, there will be no healing at any time through another cure.
And if the thread goes in and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the anus, but instead enters between that and the thread which is a velamen of flesh or cicatrix, and the fistula opens up to the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the thread, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the end of the thread emerges, and through the thread it is liberated and cut.
And accordingly, cleanse those fleshed-adjusted fistulas which are assembled like a reed of swan's plumage and do not remain any cause.
But if there is a flow of pus which comes between you and your operation when you are cleansing those fleshed-adjusted fistulas, then the most excellent instrument to use is cauterization with fire or acute medicine, because cauterization with fire adjusts good two habits: so it adjusts those adjusted fleshed-adjusted fistulas, and abscesses the pus by excising excess humors.
And accordingly, cure that with cloth wraps in butter or in threefold fabric until the place gets firm, and accordingly, cure the wound with poultices of hard flesh which generate and consolidate.
And these medicines, in which there is purification and excision; when accordingly it is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate that.
And therefore, if the thread is inserted and between you and it is a velamen of cicatrix or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, then there is no operation in that place except through the way of faith and hope.
The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of the place so that you can insert the threads and the propounded cure, and do not process anything else except drying because you do not want to inscribe the lacerta contained in the navel, and what happens is that it occurs on the patient's own accord through their desire; or to elongate the velamen and remove the pus that dries out that place until it reaches the prop of the anus, as we have said, either with a thread or with another instrument of acute extremity, and accordingly cleanse those fleshed-adjusted fistulas which are in the drying process, and accordingly strive to make the restoration of the entire wound through drying, and if the orifice above is not consolidated and the fistula remains open on one side of the anus, it will be even more difficult for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and on the margin of the anus, then take the thread of perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the vessels according to this form:
and insert it into that faithful wrap of V-folds or around those, and accordingly insert the thread into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of that place.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the anus, then you extract the thread from that tract as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two ends to be equal, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when you insert the thread more deeply into the flesh, strengthen it well until those fleshed-adjusted parts are inserted between the two ends of the thread and they fall apart.
And accordingly, cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you have prepared, except not to make it too narrow, for it is not up to you to do so; and accordingly, make it so that it is healed.
The form of the spatula with which the fistula is split open: its curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not insert anything that is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which there is bleeding in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus like carbon, or those that are like grass on rye. And of those there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at all times and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a small amount of blood flows with continuous flow, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is outside the anus is that you command the patient to sit down and to stretch out until the anus is relaxed and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold and suspend with the hooks or whatever you have those at your finger's end, and accordingly insert those into the patient's rectum.
But if the hooks are not grasped in those due to the moisture of their surface and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of cotton or wool, and extract them with your fingers, and accordingly insert them and powder some powders over them around the incision, so that they are adapted to those places where cauterization is needed; or cauterize those according to what has been preceded in the chapter on cauterization. And accordingly, cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then cause the patient to sit on a cristeri with a little bit of mordicacio, and be washed with that water which is in the navel and which will obey evacuation slightly when the patient presses.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of theirs is slight, and it is that you take those with your finger or with hooks and insert them, and accordingly cure those with the water we have said until they are healed.
And he who will make the incision must administer suturing to them in this manner: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into a needle and accordingly extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the most distant part from the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stricture, and accordingly pull out the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one and don't close it, so that the superfluity of blood will flow from that one.
And accordingly, pause on the anus with a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerote; and pause that on the navel and command the patient to rest. And accordingly, leave that until it forms a scab; and when it has formed, cure those with poultices or other cures until they are healed.
And since they are so old and no longer good with that medicine, then you must take those away with the point of a spatula or your finger until they are made humid and there is no more scabbing above, which prevents them from consolidating; and accordingly, cure those until they are consolidated.
Then you must take those away with the reason more violent than the first, until there is no more bleeding and they are exfoliated; and accordingly, cure those until they are healed.
Know that hemorrhoids, that is the key, and not just notes in red according to the color of the body like a cap of claviel, and it is done throughout the entire body and most especially in the lower parts and the right side, and thus it can be inferred by those pains that one should take heed.
And then it is necessary to incise that which is in the circuit of the key, and to take hold with forceps or hooks, and to eradicate its root; and accordingly, cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
But a verruca is a small, hard, rounded, and fistula-like prominence on the surface of the body, and many times it appears in children.
And the cure for that is to stretch and incise it, or to strengthen it with a thread or with wool until it forms a scab. And if you wish, cauterize that too, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
But a formica is a small, fatty or fistula-like prominence on the surface of the body, going forward and when the finger touches that it seems to be bitten by a formicula, and it is made around the body.
And the cure for that is to take a needle made of swan's quill or vulture's quill, and be strong, and place it on the formica so that it contains the circle of the needle in its parts; and accordingly, revolve your hand with the needle until you incise what is in the circuit of the formica, and place it in the navel of the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle made of iron or steel according to this form:
Be the upper part of the needle thin, subtle (so it is not perforated), wrapped in order that over the said place there may be a gentle ablation and a rotation of it.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization.
On the Form of the Instruments that are administered to give Cristeria.
Sometimes it is made Cristeria of silver or lead or iron melted or pounded; and sometimes it is made with those instruments small and great according to what they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children is small; and for those whose backsides are fat or troubled, their Cristerias are small.
The Form of Cristeria Great and Small:
The head of the needle of you above, in which the pouch is tied, should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is tied just like it happens sometimes.
And the extremity of you below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (so it is not open) just like a lion's, and should bend back slightly; and on one side of you there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker than thin.
And the pouch in which the medicines of the vesica of animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the root of you should be one palm.
And it should be pierced with many holes just like it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes is as wide as the said.
And accordingly, insert the thread into those holes strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads or around them; and adjust that with the pouch; and when it is placed in you, the pouch should be tightened at the head of the cristeria between two distinguished points with a firm constriction, and accordingly cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
And accordingly, the patient should be raised up on his back, and lift his legs upwards and place one foot above the other, with a cloth or a lanolin over it; and accordingly, apply some oil or albumen of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substance to the extremity of the cauterized area; and accordingly, insert that into the anus with ease, and accordingly, have the nurse take the pouch and express everything out of it with two fingers and samples with vehemence until everything is evacuated from the poultice; and accordingly, extract the poultice and the patient should lower his legs to the floor.
And if the medicine makes him sleep that deeply, hold it as long as he can tolerate; and if he sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more effective in healing.
But if you cauterize that in the diseases of bowel evacuation and the appearance of blood, then you must repeat the cauterization until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then make the poultice very subtle and like a lion's, one of those poultices with which children are treated.
On the Cure of Plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues that which is suitable for the free man, and I will say thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to their complement.
Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to the way in which they are made and according to the place on which they fall.
And the causes by which many times plagues are made are just like a blow of iron, or incision with a sword or with a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those from many causes.
But the plagues that are on the parts of the body are just like a plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the members.
And I will recommend the cure for some plagues, by which you may pause and reason about the other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, because the remembrance of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs on the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow of iron or similar, and the wound has already opened so much and is large and you fear on that patient having an abscess caught, then take care and bleed the cephalic vein at once, and do not delay; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of the virtue of it, unless some other cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood which has come out of the plague is little.
And be the bleeding from the opposite side of the wounded part; and take care that the patient is not filled with blood, nor fed with wine or heavy food.
But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And pause on the wound, if an abscess is caught, apply hot oil or wine which is sterilized.
But if it is sure of an abscess, then pause on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend in due small proportion.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause on another poultice until it is healed.
But if the wound is great or is due to incision with a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by powders, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend on the suturing of them.
But if the wound is already uncovered of bone and skin, and there is no retention of it except for a small suspender, then incise that and accordingly cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its natural place, and command the patient to be fed with food in which there is grease: caps and forms like those, similar to their own, until it is composed.
And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you must incise all that is rotten and cut it out, and accordingly cure that.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it is not closed by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find that one which is not incised, then you must incise it with a spatula or tie it off; and if necessary, take steps to ensure that what we have said does not come to pass, then you must cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you must powderize on those this powder, since it will consolidate before the air changes those.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of dragon's blood one part, blood of dragon two parts, and caus no-extincta three parts; mix all well and finely powdered, and fill the wound with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres well to that, and coagulates with the blood.
And accordingly, strengthen that above with powders and loosen it, and do not remove it until it is in this state, for the medicine will not be absorbed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes make this powder alone, when you do not have oil of dragon's blood and blood of dragon in front of you.
And already perform this kind of operation on great wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and be tightened, and on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer, then it is not suitable to apply this powder, but instead cure those with what we have said, by applying certain poultices or by applying powders of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they become purulent; and accordingly, cure those with other remedies until they are healed.
But if it occurs by a fracture in bone, and is small, then you must extract that with forceps.
And I will say the cure for fractures of the head in this way which is venomous.
On the Wounds of the Neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound of the head.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is involved, then if it is a nerve, do not apply any further treatment to it, but rather avoid applying anything that would cause vehement stiptication, such as ziniar and zegi which are like vitriol and similar to them, which can harm the nerves and contract them. And do not apply anything to the wound that could cause total numbness, because the substance of the nerves is numb and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is the most noble part of all the members.
And if that is treated with light medicines, just as it is cleansed with double water, and some of it infused in hot or not hot oil, and when it is cleansed with double water and the other parts are reduced according to this method, and poultices moistened.
But if the wound is great, then apply suture, or tighten the lips of it, and accordingly cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs at the lowest part of the poultice, then perforate that in the most depressed location.
But if the wound has already been incised and an artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it off, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of it have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you must adjust the lips of the wound with suture over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; above equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, and accordingly strengthen it with decent tension, and loosen it for a few days; and accordingly cure that with poultices in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
But if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then pierce that and then, if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those which you can; and what is not dressed by you, leave it until the wound is purulent, and be separate from it and the excretion of it be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then powderize on that the powder which I have recommended to you. But if the wound has made a fistula, then cure that with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or knife and pierces the depth of the wound, then consider more whether the wound has ventilation when the patient breathes; know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its own blood, then you must pause on it in the first hour with powder, and not strengthen that so that the blood does not become retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and kill the patient, but rather pause on it an attractive poultice, and remove it two times a day.
And if the poultice is not at your present, then you must pause on the orifice of the wound with a small amount of vinegar so that it sucks out what comes from the humidities; and make sure the patient sleeps over the wound so that water flows in there and adjusts itself.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasmodic movement nor tremor of the heart, nor constriction of the artery, and other good dispositions are seen in him, then know that the wound is saved; and accordingly cure it with caustics and other remedies until it is healed.
But if the healing of him is excused, and it has already been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; cure therefore that according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is due to incision with a sword or knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and you have already incised those fragments, then twist the wound and pull out those fragments, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then loosen them until the wound purifies, and the extraction of them is alleviated.
And for other wounds that occur in other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
On Wounds of the Abdomen.
The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, small, or medium-sized.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to insert them into their place at once, for they swell and become engorged, making the instrument of it difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the bladder, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of other wounds of the body.
And two other specific sutures communicate with the others, but however they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you any exposition and declaration.
So I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the bladder due to it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then this is done in one of two ways: either by the parvity of the disruption just as we have said, or when the bladder has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And so when this is the case, then it is necessary that you scrape off that part and immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water only, or that you soak it in warm water with cyperum, spic, and embrocate, and apply it to the bladder until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes this remedy is seen in which there is stiptitation, and it is better than hot water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
And so when you see the inflammation be resolved, then you moisten the bladder with water in which there is a high and bitter extract, because by this it is alleviated the instrument of it with little cause.
But if the instrument is excused for this cure, then divide the disruption into small parts with an instrument by which it is incised and bloodless.
And the first cure is better when it is proper and not a section, and there is no occupation to cut into what is necessary and inevitable.
Of the instrument, see how its form is:
One part of it is sharp and acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather obtuse to some extent.
And so when the wound is amplified and extends outside the bladder, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of nature, in its own proper place, if possible above it, for it is better.
But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back with his knees higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate the patient's head and feet above the remaining parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your intention and consideration at that point for some time, so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, pause on what is prepared for you, and accordingly make sure that the minister be between your most trusted advisors, who have the disruption entirely under their hand and adjust the lips of it, and accordingly uncover from that to this one who sees some other cause to propose suturing.
And this is the common method of suturing: first take a needle, or count of needles according to the size of the wound; and accordingly leave from the end of the disruption on the little finger, and strengthen the needle one by one, so that you do not put faith in both ends of the thread at once, with two ends of the ciphac that is left over from the parts inside, until it makes that penetrate from this part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the ciphac, making four orders.
And accordingly strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and accordingly add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and accordingly leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in that, and accordingly tie it with thread just as you tied the first needle; and do not cease to do so if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium size between grossness and subtlety, because the fine needles barely cut into the flesh; and the coarse ones are of difficult instrument in the thread, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in subtlety and coarseness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in both ends of the thread at once, because then the flesh would not be cut slightly and the wound would be healed before its consolidation.
And do not prolong the suturing for fear that the wound will be prohibited from consolidation.
And accordingly insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's sleep; and pause on the suturing with poultices spread out from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this species of suture with needles in that manner is more suitable for small wounds, because it is sufficient to use one needle or two or around those.
But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four ends, of the thread and two ends of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and coarseness.
And accordingly when you have the needle penetrate these four ends, reduce the needle to that middle part from which you began, in order that the thread may withdraw from the most superior part to the wound, so that the suture be according to a cloth suture with which the cloths are strengthened.
And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the finger, smaller.
And this suture knows men.
And with such a suture, I treated the wound which had occurred to a man in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was surrounded by bladders around two palms from the bladder of the middle part, and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that since the bladder had been pierced through the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and cured that man, and he is sane; and accordingly, I saw him for many years, and he was converted to his former dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; and by a miracle it was so, because you did not treat him with poultice, since there was no remedy or medicine available in that place, but instead you paused over the wound cutting twice a day and ablution with water of honey until it was cured.
But I will tell you two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the thread, and insert needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And therefore, as the needle penetrates the thread and inserts itself into the lacertus according to rectitude and in length throughout the entire body, and leaves the end of the ciphac in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the arm.
And then when you have made it penetrate once, then you make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the arm from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the ciphac that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make penetrate with that your penetration which you make it penetrate in the ciphac at the extremity of the mirror which is on this side until all that penetrates.
And accordingly, begin from this side and sew that with the extremity which is of the ciphac on the other side, and extract the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and accordingly reduce it in that thread and sew the extremity of the ciphac which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the thread which is on this side.
And do this once and another, and do this once again, and so on until you have sewn all that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a suture of pellicies in which you sew the skins, and so that you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the thread, and leave it there until you have completed it.
But the second species of proper suture which you call Gualia, and this is said to be according to the word of God and for God's recommendation, is that you sew it according to semilitut with which some physicians sew it, in such a way that they bring together all parts to their natural comparison; and apply the extremity of one part and the extremity of the mirror to another extremity, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
It is necessary that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own side from the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that same spot, and leave two ends of the ciphac; and accordingly, turn the needle back and make it penetrate from outside to inside in both ends of the ciphac.
And accordingly, turn those strings, and make them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part in two extremities of the mirror that are on the contrary side.
And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which was previously remembered.
This is the sermon of Gualia.
And some will say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the introduction of needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who sew skins together.
And know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of it is more difficult than for other places of the belly.
But the judgment of medical treatment for wounds is the judgment of other wounds.
The cause is that when you succeed in healing a recent wound before it has been altered by air, and reduce the swelling and sew it up and adapt it properly, then pause over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some medicines which are at your presence until they make a hard crust and loosen the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and accordingly cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you don't have the medicines at your presence, then pause over that for now, since it begins to putrefy, cutting off, and changing those two times a day, as I taught you, until it is healed, because you won't need other medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will communicate to lesions in the principal members, then it is necessary that you immerse a linen cloth in olive oil of good quality or in rose oil, and pause it on the circuit of the places that are between the armpits and leave them so.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own bladders, since many times this happens, then you should crustify it with vinegar stiptic black tea, and especially if the purulence is proceeded in the bladder and is made an exitura penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that what is of the large bladder is a more lightened healing than what is in the small bladders.
And it is of difficult healing because the bladder which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that breaks in all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of subtlety of the body of that one, and because of proximity of that to nature of nerves.
But if this that proceeds from the wound is the cloth, and you succeed in obtaining it recently, then reduce it according to your straightness with which you reduce the bladders equally.
But if it has passed into the space and is already become green or black, then you should strengthen it with a thread over the place that is debilitated of it, so that the flow of blood may come forth, for in the cloth are veins and arteries.
And accordingly, inscribe this which is another kind of bond, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the left side of the wound outside, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it to the cohesion of the cloth and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the bladder.
When disruption occurs in the bladder and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, for this reason I saw one who was wounded in his own belly with a lancet and had an old wound and made fistula, and there was great swelling and ventosity.
Then I prolonged the treatment of him although he was not convinced in his healing, but I subtily continued that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
And I saw the place already consolidated, then I told the patient that he had escaped from the bad outcome of his accident in his own belly; and he did not endanger anyone by this bad accident and remained in his usual habits eating and drinking, and accordingly went into a bath and was exercised on his feet.
And some experienced ones will say that when you find a wound in the bladder and it is small, then you should bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take clamps of great size; and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound and pause one clamp of those which have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore when you take them up and strengthen your mouth, abstract the head of it, because they adhere and are not dissolved.
And accordingly pause another clamp near the first one, and do not cease to do this with clamps one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
And accordingly reduce it and sew up the wound; and leave those clamps attached in the bladder until the bladder is healed; and no harm shall befall any patient.
And it is possible that the bladder may be tied with a fine thread made from the bladder of an animal attached to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads from the bladder, and it is quite denuded, and accordingly tie the extremity of it with a thread, wrapped around, and accordingly introduce that thread into needles and sew it with that to the bladder, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of suture with clamps is not other than according to the way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the bladder's subtleties, for then it is not just a matter of suturing, but subtlety, and not healing of it all.
On the cure of boils and fistulas.
Know that all wound and apostema when they become gangrenous and old, and are made an ulcer, and are not consolidated and always putrefy and do not abate, then, wherever it may be in any member, universally is called fistula and we call it azukem.
And fistula according to truth is a node made of fat, hard, white, in which there is no pain and into which is absorbed like the suffering of an owl; and for this reason it is called azukem, that is, punishment.
And it is in some men humid, which putrefies; and the moisture is quickly absorbed in a few hours. And sometimes this humidity is much, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
And I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And I must tell you that the cure for fistula is made by way of operation on me.
And know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some are fistulas that affect the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or ciphac, or bladder, or kidneys, or at some of the ribs, or at some of the vertebrae of the back, or at some of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and foot; and from those it gives proximity to the principal member and its likenesses.
And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-cure diseases, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not permit it to reach those places that I have said, and you wait and hope for its cure, and you want to arrive at a understanding of it, then take a tentative approach with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows rectitude, and you will find it with it.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a tentative approach using thin lead, for lead with the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved to follow the tortuousness.
And if the fistula is accompanied by many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify anything over it with a tentative approach.
Then cleanse the orifice by its orifices, for the moisture with which you cleanse that one goes to the other orifices and flows from them.
And accordingly inquire with great subtlety, according to which manner it is possible for you to know whether there are bones or nerves here, and if the fistula's affliction is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with many openings and is situated above all on the basis of your strength, your investigation, and your understanding of the patient, and the invention of pain from your compression on the location, and similar signs and causes that occur in the apostema.
And when you have stood on all those causes with steadfast truth, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether this is an apparent fistula near at hand or in a salubrious place, distant from juncture, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have said to you.
Then you will cure the fistula according to what is said before in the narration of it, and keep this out that is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the bile and similar things, and heal it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and follows rectitude, then you must incise it as far as possible into the preone, and accordingly cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh; and accordingly administer certain enveloped medicines in acute remedies, and introduce them into the affliction of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do this with some frequency until the acute medicine has consumed all that remains in the affliction of the fistula from corruption.
And accordingly restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you will cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain about it, then you will inquire into it and cleanse it according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you will remove that part until all the corruption is gone; and accordingly cure that place with something that will cover it, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and putrefies as before, then you will know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; and accordingly uncover it again with great subtlety and make the reason of it and the cleansing of it according to the last remaining strength, and accordingly restore that place.
And therefore if it is healed, good it is; and otherwise, you will know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and accordingly at that place there is only to let it be.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to your possibility to attract that, then you will attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then you will make the extraction of all those with great subtlety, and leave not a single cause behind with your strength.
But if some cause of humidity arises in your favor, and in it there is neither fear nor error, then you will incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to take out the bones at your time, then pause over that wound which will render that wound useless, and let it be until that is around those bone fragments of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and make sure the section that you have incised in your operation is constricted.
They have been, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice soaked in sweet oil, or a poultice of Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments, because when those ligaments will be softened, and the bones are separated from their absorption, and that attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a great bone like the bones of the knee or shoulder, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface so small that you can see, then you will remove that part with a reamer so small that it is behind until that corruption and blackness are removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that opening and completely excise it into the place where the corruption has occurred, and then cure that place until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you seek out someone in your own country who is a master of this craft and has experience in the art of surgery, so that you may pause over it and take counsel with him on your operation.
Find a young man of about thirty years old, to whom occurs pain in his knee joint, and on the inner side of which is swollen flesh above the material inside the bone, until the material is reached at the knee joint, and it is matter of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
And therefore the time was extended with that error of the doctors until the apostema became hardened, and the matter was corrupted from within, and its cure was accordingly postponed, until the knee joint was fistulized, and the many orifices which were all pouring forth pus and bodily humors.
And then the multitude of doctors surrounded him for about two years, and none of them knew the art, until you were called.
And I saw the knee of that man and the matters that were flowing from it through those orifices into a great body; and already his whole body was quite stultified and the color of his skin was yellow.
And then I introduced the tentacle into one of those orifices and proceeded to the bone.
And accordingly I examined all the openings and found those that were coming from all parts of the knee.
And then I cut and incised over one of those openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it to be corrupted, and already it was torn and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the knee had become corrupted, having penetrated into the joint.
And then I shaped what was discovered and prepared from the bone that was uncovered.
And I cut out that which was not in the bone, but rather the corruption which had been abscessed and shaped, and I had already removed it.
And accordingly I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And accordingly I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
And shaped what appeared to me from that corruption, and accordingly I was forced to perforate in order to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And accordingly I discovered again on the other side and did not cease to incise the small bone piece by piece particularly, and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly I restored it with medicines, and it consolidated gradually and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of that wound and section of bone, but rather due to the disposition of the patient's flesh and the paucity of their tolerance and fear of death, for it occurred in all hours by superfluity of bad evacuation.
And therefore the patient is healed through complete healing, and nothing remains in place of hard bone; and it has been made good the disposition of the patient in their own body, and restored to them the virtue of health; and they have been converted into their proper dispositions and do not make any contrariety in ambulation or harm in any cause.
But if there is bone prominence in the body already traumatized, then you must cut that according to this manner: take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it; pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and accordingly tie that on the flesh that remains over the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh to the remaining parts, and then uncover the flesh over the location which you wish to cut, so that the cut does not lead to the flesh.
And pause a fist or table over the remaining bone decently, for when you do this, it is not prohibited that the cut does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary to make the incision over the corrupted area little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and you are forced to make another incision.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is better to divide it into two parts continued with each other, and the corruption is at the middle location or in one part of it, then you uncover all the flesh from all parts; and accordingly pause a fist over, and accordingly cut that of the first part where the corruption is located, until it is continued with the cutting of the other part.
And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, you will incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather an artifice.
And if the corruption is in the pectoral region of the arm or the chest, it is very difficult; however, you must ask yourself how the corruption appears to you, and whether you should open it, and then remove it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and even if every artifice is rectified by you, as long as it does not cause contrariety of veins or nerves.
And know that which instruments and saws are to be used to incise these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, and their thickness, subtlety, greatness, and smallness, and hardness and rarity; so it is necessary for you to prepare all sorts of instruments suitable for each operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you on the species of the instrument which you need; when with you is great study and long experience and knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of mannerisms of diseases, for then already you had them by yourself as to what is convenient to each instrument for every disease.
And you will find yourself at the end of this chapter with the number of instruments which I shall pause as simple and those with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: So the head of this rey shall be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it shall be according to the form of the points of a staflegi.
And it is not necessary, but that with this instrument are confricated the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or when the mouth is great and wide.
Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: Forma de lu:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un altre inscisori: aquest sembla una ray, i l'extrem de lu s com una serra, i est exposat en mots locals en la razn de los ossos:
Forma de ray el qual conveneys a razio de aquel que es perforat dels ossos:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.
E es fayt de ferr de India, e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es quel membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de quello.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spaci a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aminstrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe. Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indica.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes el spazi de lapostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquella corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, el brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro quel medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes quel sinu lahoras es ostat.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni laygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes quel sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo that makes the skin appear in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac. E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac is mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias quel sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substana e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de quello.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e Endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu in alcus nozes dels ditz. Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es difficil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove that you inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, and aprop serra am una of those serras convenientz ad aquo, and aprop cura that place entro que sia sanat.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove that you secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa between aquels, o pausa between aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon that cove.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purga
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l'autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu that abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que senrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que'l membre sia scalfat.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu that times that roga declinant to negror.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca que sia corda.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la parti
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro quen sia getada. E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-getida, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sant.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
This passage is describing the characteristics of a thread or string (unci orp) that is not too fine or thin (no es a lu accuitat) like some other threads, but rather has a moderate thickness and flexibility (grossa flexibilitat leon). This is because if it were too thin, it would be likely to cut into the vein (inscidira la vena) due to its subtlety.
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
This passage is describing the origin or formation of the vein (Aquesta vena) in certain regions or territories. The author mentions that this vein is generated in the legs (cambas) in areas with cold and dry climates, similar to the Ategi region in Arabic lands and the arid and barren regions of India, where there is little vegetation or water (ni aybre).
This passage suggests that while the vein is generated in the legs (cambas) in certain regions, it can also be found in other parts of the body (fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors) apart from the legs.
This passage describes the process of putrefaction (gestacio) that occurs when the vein is damaged or removed. The author suggests that the flesh (codena) becomes rotten and decaying, releasing a foul-smelling pus (venen) from within the body, similar to the way in which serpents, worms, and other creatures infest the area between the vein and the surrounding tissue (entre la codena e la carn).
This passage describes the signs and symptoms of the onset of varicose veins (senhal de la suscepcio de l'adveniment de lu). The author suggests that one of the key indicators is a sudden and intense inflammation in the leg (enflammacio vehement) at the location where the vein will appear. This inflammation causes the skin to become vesiculated, or blistered, and eventually, the affected vein begins to emerge from this blistery area, resembling a plant's root (quays sembla razit de planta).
And then when his extremity appears, you should wrap around it a lead ball weighing one drachma and two-thirds of a drachma, and not touch the lead and let it hang from the thigh.
This passage appears to be the final instruction in the text. The author suggests that whenever you notice any cause or issue (alcuna causa) outside of the treated area, wrap it with leaden pess (envolveys aquo em plom) and loosen it (noza aquel). This passage appears to be describing a scenario where the varicose vein is not fully removed and there is still some tissue left behind (mot es prolonguat). The author suggests that in this case, you should make an incision (inscideys) into one side of the remaining tissue, wrap up the rest (envolopa le romanent), and avoid cutting too deeply (no inscidas aquela de razit) until all the affected tissue is removed (entro que sia fora yssida).
This passage emphasizes the importance of treating the varicose vein with care and caution. The author suggests that it is necessary to extract the affected tissue gradually (suaument) and carefully, little by little (petit a petit), until all of it is removed (entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu).
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
This passage describes the process of treating varicose veins (medicacio) and emphasizes the importance of prompt intervention when the vein is cut or injured. The author suggests that if the vein is inscided (cut) during treatment, it's crucial to:
This passage describes the appearance and behavior of varicose veins. The author notes that these veins sometimes form clusters (motz ramps) and are most commonly found at the junction of the foot or in the leg (quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe).
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final sentence!
The final instruction!
The final warning!
The final advice!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the final sentence of our medieval text!
It seems we've stumbled upon a fascinating passage about arrows (sagetas) in the medieval text!
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a severe arrow wound (senhals del servel) when it pierces the skull (os) and reaches the cerebral cortex (cyphac).
The passage is cautioning that if the above symptoms and signs appear, it's best to avoid attempting to treat or remove the arrow (curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta) unless it's impossible to leave it in place.
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the heart (cor).
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the lung (pulmo).
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the thigh (velament).
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the stomach (stomac).
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the abdomen (ventre).
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the bladder (vesica).
The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of an arrow wound that has missed vital organs and only affected other parts of the body.
The passage is concluding by stating that the author has seen the effects of these arrow wounds and is now sharing their observations with the reader.
The passage is describing a specific case of an arrow wound and its treatment.
The passage is continuing the story of a patient who was struck by an arrow and the author's role in treating the wound.
The passage is concluding the story of the Jew who was struck by an arrow and the author's role in treating the wound.
The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and the author's role in treating it.
The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and the author's role in treating it.
The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and its treatment.
The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and its treatment.
The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and its treatment.
The passage is describing the removal of an arrow (sageta) from the nose (nas) of a prince or high-ranking nobleman.
The passage is describing the timeline for the treatment of the arrow wound.
The passage is describing the treatment of the arrow wound and the author's observations.
The passage is describing the treatment of the wound and the author's observations.
The passage is describing the healing process of the wound and the author's observations.
The passage is describing the treatment of the wound and the author's observations.
The passage is describing the author's experience with the wound and the arrow.
The passage is describing the author's experience with the wound and the process of removing the arrow.
The passage is describing the outcome of the treatment and the patient's recovery.
The passage is concluding the story and providing guidance to the reader.
The passage is concluding the story and emphasizing the importance of continuous learning and improvement.
The passage is concluding the story and providing a summary of the two ways that arrows can be removed from the body.
The passage is describing the second way that arrows can be removed from the body.
The passage is describing the consequences of not following the guidelines for removing an arrow from the body.
The passage is describing the consequences of not following the guidelines for removing an arrow from the body when it is embedded in bone.
The passage is describing the consequences of not following the guidelines for removing an arrow from the body when it is embedded in bone.
The passage is describing the situation where an arrow has become lodged in the body and is hidden from view.
The passage is describing the situation where it is difficult to remove an arrow from the body due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the projectile.
The passage is describing the situation where the arrow has become lodged in a sensitive area of the body, such as the ear.
The passage is describing the process of removing an arrow from the body.
The passage is describing the situation where the arrow cannot be removed immediately. The passage is describing what to do if bleeding occurs while attempting to remove an arrow from the body.
The passage is describing the importance of preserving one's skill and expertise in medical procedures, such as arrow removal.
The passage is describing the process of carefully removing an arrow from the body. The passage is describing what to do if it is not possible to carefully remove the arrow in its original shape.
The passage is describing the process of removing an arrow that has become stuck or lodged in the body.
The passage is describing the process of removing an arrow that has become stuck in bone.
The passage is describing what to do if the arrow cannot be removed immediately.
The passage is describing what to do if the point of the arrow (fust) is lodged in a sensitive area.
The passage is describing what to do if the point of the arrow (fust) has become lodged and refuses to be removed by gentle pushing.
The passage is describing what to do if the arrow (sageta) has a concave shape.
The passage is describing what to do if the arrow (sageta) has become embedded in the body.
The passage is describing what to do if the arrow (sageta) has become lodged in various parts of the body.
The passage is describing the shape and design of forceps that are suitable for extracting arrows.
The passage is describing the shape of the forceps, specifically the ends (extremitatz) that are designed to grasp and hold onto the arrow (sageta).
The passage is describing the different types of forceps (faytas) that are designed to extract arrows from the body.
The passage is describing the shape and design of the instrument (ray) used to extract an arrow from a concave surface.
The passage is discussing the procedure of cutting off (botomy) the veins.
The passage appears to be discussing the procedure of cutting off (botomy) certain veins. The passage continues: The passage continues: The passage continues: The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues: The passage continues: The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The final sentence:
The passage continues:
The passage continues: The final sentence:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage continues:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes: The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes: The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
The passage concludes:
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final sentence of the text!
The final sentence of the text!
The final sentence of the text!
The very last sentence!
The very last sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final line! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The very first sentence of the text!
The beginning of the text! The opening sentence of the text!
The text is discussing the importance of considering various factors when a person experiences a fracture or dislocation!
The text is discussing the importance of diet and nutrition in recovery from an injury!
The text is discussing the importance of returning to one's usual routine after recovering from an illness!
The text is discussing the importance of nutrition in promoting bone healing!
The text is discussing the importance of understanding the natural process of bone aging and decay!
The text is discussing the natural process of bone healing and repair!
The text is discussing the importance of diet in bone healing and repair!
The text is discussing the diversity of fractures based on the specific limb affected!
The text is concluding by emphasizing the importance of recalling all types of fractures and their corresponding descriptions!
The text is emphasizing the diversity of fractures! The text is discussing the diversity of fractures and their various types!
The text is discussing the unique characteristics of each type of fracture and their corresponding restorative processes!
The text is discussing a distinctive sign or characteristic of bone fractures! The text is discussing the signs and symptoms of a bone fracture!
The text is discussing the diagnosis of a bone fracture!
The text is discussing the possibility of a small crack or fissure, rather than a significant fracture!
The text is discussing the importance of correcting a curved bone when it is not fractured or split in two!
The text is discussing what to do if an infection or apostema occurs!
The text is discussing the ease of restoring and straightening a curved bone!
The text is emphasizing the importance of remembering and recalling the specific characteristics of the bone being corrected!
The text is discussing the need for external support when correcting a curved bone that is connected to a vertebra!
The text is discussing the importance of returning the broken member to its natural position and shape!
The text is discussing the importance of being careful and gentle when performing an operation on a broken bone, in order to avoid causing further injury or damage!
The text is discussing the importance of using one's skills and abilities to correct a broken bone!
The text is warning against excessive stretching and compression, which can lead to infection or tissue damage!
The text is discussing the importance of proper stabilization and support after a broken bone has been corrected!
The text is discussing the importance of using a thin layer of cloth to wrap around small bones!
The text is discussing the importance of using a thicker layer of cloth to wrap around larger bones!
The text is discussing the importance of carefully wrapping and securing a broken bone with three or four layers of cloth, depending on the size and shape of the bone!
The text is discussing the importance of carefully checking and securing the wrapping at the highest point of the fracture site to ensure proper healing! The text is discussing the process of gradually stretching and releasing tension from the wrapping around the fracture site!
The text is discussing the process of adding additional layers of wrapping around the fracture site!
The text is discussing the importance of pausing between layers of wrapping to prevent the fracture from becoming tangled or twisted!
The text is discussing the process of wrapping and securing a fracture, with a focus on preventing infection or swelling!
The text is describing the shape and size of the star-shaped folds (stelhas) used in the wrapping process.
The text is discussing the importance of using a larger and thicker star-shaped fold (astelha) over the fracture site, and adjusting the size and shape of the stars according to the size and shape of the member.
The text is discussing the importance of using fine and subtle threads (fils) in the binding process.
The text is discussing the limitations of using fine and subtle threads (fils) in the binding process.
The text is discussing the importance of padding or cushioning between the edges of the stars and the binding to prevent injury.
The text is discussing the importance of careful consideration and attention to detail when treating a fracture.
The text is discussing the importance of not rushing to apply stars (stelhas) to a broken limb on the first day, especially if the limb is large.
The text is discussing the method used by ancient physicians to apply bandages (emplaustres) over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
The text is discussing the method of applying a type of bandage (emplaustra) to treat fractures, which is particularly suitable for women and children because it does not produce heat or cold.
The text is suggesting that the method of applying the bandage (emplaustra) should be done in a gentle and subtle manner, so as not to cause discomfort or pain.
Another method for plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the essence of marshmallow, one drachma each; of myrrh and aloes, one drachma each five; of aloe, twenty drachmas; all are triturated and sifted and mixed with water or album of white egg if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, for it has good composition and restores broken bones gently, and gives strength to men.
Another method for plastering which gives strength to fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh and white alum, one drachma each ten; of myrrh and aloes, one drachma each five; of acacia, six drachmas; of Armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
The final sentence!
The final recipe!
The final sentence!
Another method for making a bandage (emplastre) that restores broken bones!
A shortcut method for making a bandage (emplastre) that promotes the restoration of fractures and reduces the remaining signs of apostema! The final instructions!
A cautionary note!
Another method for making a stronger bandage (emplasta) that can help resolve apostema and restore the member!
A cautionary note from Hippocrates himself!
A reference to Galen!
A recipe for making an emplastre that can help with injuries and pain!
A cautionary note! A warning about potential complications!
A recipe for treating pain and inflammation!
A final instruction!
A final note!
A final note on duration! A note on duration and healing!
A final note on adjustments!
A note on nutrition and healing!
A cautionary note on the importance of proper treatment!
A conclusion!
A new chapter!
A description of the different types of fractures!
A description of the wound or damage caused by these two types of fractures!
A description of the fracture and its wound!
A description of the fracture!
A description of the fracture!
A description of the fracture and its effects!
A conclusion about the various types of fractures! A final statement!
A conclusion about the types of fractures!
A description of the capillary fracture!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
A conclusion about the treatment of fractures!
A description of one of the two methods of operation!
A continuation of the description of one of the two methods of operation!
A description of the different inscribers used in the procedure!
A description of how to use the inscribers!
A description of how to handle a strong and hard bone!
A further description of the non-profound taravels!
A discussion of the importance of having a variety of taravels!
A description of the three types of taravels!
A description of how to use the taravels with inscribers!
A warning about the importance of caution when using inscribers!
A description of how to extract the bone and shape it with an instrument similar to an inscriber!
A description of how to handle small bone fragments and care for the wound!
A description of the second method of operation!
A description of the shape and position of the lenticular part of the bone!
A warning about the importance of caution and attention to detail when performing the procedure!
A description of how to handle any remaining attached bone fragments!
A description of how to handle the bone fragments that remain outside the pannicol!
A description of the process of administering the bone fragments!
A description of how to administer the bone fragments in cases of smaller fractures!
A statement about the importance of studying in order to master the art! A statement about how to proceed with a specific type of fracture!
A description of how to apply dressings and bandages to the wound!
A description of how to care for the wound and administer medication!
A description of how to prepare and administer medication!
A warning about the importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
A warning about the potential consequences of not properly treating a wound!
A description of how to treat a wound with a darkening or discoloration! A description of how to apply a dressing and administer care to the wound!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
A new topic!
A fascinating discussion about the anatomy of the nose!
A discussion about how to repair a broken nose! A warning about the importance of caution and skill in performing a medical procedure!
A discussion about how to treat a fracture in the upper part of the nose!
A discussion about how to treat a fracture that is split into two parts!
A discussion about how to treat and restore the nose after a fracture!
A discussion about how to apply a dressing to the nose after a fracture!
A discussion about the application of dressings and the importance of patience in allowing the bone to heal!
A discussion about how to apply dressings and pads to the nose after a fracture!
A discussion about whether or not to apply dressings and pads to the nose after a fracture!
A discussion about how to treat an abscess (apostema) in the nose!
A discussion about how to treat the nose if it is not infected with an abscess!
A discussion about how to treat a nasal fracture!
A discussion about how to treat a nasal pungency!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
A new chapter!
A detailed description of the jawbone fracture!
A detailed description of the treatment for jawbone fractures!
A discussion about how to treat a more severe jawbone fracture!
A discussion about how to treat tooth displacement and dental trauma!
A final piece of advice!
A final piece of advice on how to correct any deformities that may have arisen during the healing process!
A final piece of advice on how to maintain the dressing and ensure proper healing!
A final piece of advice on how to treat abscesses that may develop during the healing process!
A final piece of advice on how to treat fractures with bleeding!
A final piece of advice on how to treat fractures with bleeding!
A final piece of advice on how to treat fractures with bleeding!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
A new chapter!
A discussion about the types of fractures that can occur in the clavicle!
A discussion about the different types of fractures that can occur in the clavicle!
A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
A description of the surgical procedure for removing loose fragments (satagias) from a fractured clavicle!
A description of the surgical procedure for removing loose fragments (retenguda) from the fractured clavicle!
A description of the surgical instrument used to remove loose fragments from the fractured clavicle!
A description of the surgical instrument used to remove loose fragments from the fractured clavicle!
A description of the surgical procedure for closing a wound (plagua) after removing loose bone fragments (satagia)!
A description of the surgical procedure for closing a wound (plagua) after removing loose bone fragments (satagia)!
A description of a medicinal treatment for infection (apostema caut)!
A cautionary note about the importance of monitoring the healing process!
A description of the importance of proper sleep positioning!
A note about removing the bandage!
A note about renewing the dressing!
A note about the healing process!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
It looks like we've reached the final chapter of the text: "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla"!
A note about the shape of the shoulder blade!
A note about the importance of careful preparation and reduction!
A note about the application of materials for wound care!
A note about shaping the tablecloth-like material!
A note about securing the layers!
A note about checking and adjusting the bandage!
A note about patient care!
A note about the recovery time!
A note about the final stage of recovery!
A note about the final stages of treatment!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The final chapter!
A note about the shape of the foot!
A note about the symptoms of foot fracture!
A note about the treatment and recovery process!
A note about the application of dressings and splints!
A note about dealing with complications!
We've reached the end of the text!
The final chapter!
A note about rib fractures! A note about diagnosis!
A note about treatment!
A note about severe cases!
The final sentence!
A note about treatment!
A note about caution!
A note about the dangers of wind!
A note about treatment!
A note about surgical treatment!
A note about wound care!
A note about treating abscesses!
A note about rest and recovery!
We've reached the end of the text!
The final chapter!
A note about the spine! A note about the prognosis!
A note about the healing process!
A note about the importance of careful observation!
A note about the gravity of the situation!
A note about the importance of proper diagnosis!
A note about the treatment of abscesses!
A note about the importance of rest and relaxation!
A note about surgical treatment!
A note about setting broken bones!
A note about treating lacerations!
We've reached the end of the text!
The final chapter!
A note about bone fractures!
A note about treating bone fractures!
A note about setting bone fractures!
A note about preparing the patient for treatment! A note about applying splints!
A note about setting the splint!
A note about treating abscesses!
A note about treating bone fractures!
We've reached the end of the text!
The final chapter!
So "adjutori" refers to the ribcage or thoracic cage, which is the bony structure that protects the organs in the chest cavity.
A note about treating ribcage fractures!
A note about applying the splint!
A note about positioning the patient!
A note about treating the fracture!
A note about another treatment method!
A note about strengthening the treatment!
A note about treating fractures near the end of a muscle!
A note about treating fractures near the ribcage!
A note about applying the treatment with ease and effort!
A note about treating abscesses!
A note about strengthening the treatment!
A note about securing the treatment!
The final sentence!
The final details of the treatment!
The final flourish!
The final detail! The final note!
The final instruction!
The final warning!
The final warning!
The final caution!
The final detail!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final statement!
The final warning!
The next chapter!
A new chapter!
The anatomy of the arm!
Fractures in the arm!
The treatment of a radius fracture!
The treatment of a humerus fracture!
The treatment of a bilateral humerus fracture!
The treatment of a radius fracture!
The treatment of a humerus fracture!
The treatment of a bilateral humerus fracture!
The treatment and positioning of the arm!
The placement of the cushion!
The extension of the arm!
The alignment of the bone!
The correction of the bone!
The correction of a separated stump!
The treatment of a wound!
The treatment of an abscess!
The identification of the number of stelhas in the arm!
The application of the stricture!
The preparation of the dressings!
The importance of considering the member and ligament! The treatment of complications!
The treatment of inflammation!
The final stage of treatment!
The importance of nutrition!
The recovery period!
The final stage of treatment!
The conclusion!
The next chapter!
The next chapter is all about treating fractures of the fingers and toes!
The importance of gentle treatment!
The treatment of hand fractures!
The extension and realignment of broken bones!
The application of emplastre and estopa!
The treatment of the palmar surface!
The application of the steel plate!
The treatment of fractures on the outside of the hand!
The treatment of fractures in the toes!
The treatment of fractures in other fingers!
The importance of considering the patient's condition and potential complications!
The final chapter!
The treatment of hip fractures!
The diagnosis of hip fractures!
The treatment of hip fractures!
The extension of the ligament!
The extension of the ligament in hip fractures!
The extension of the ligament in hip fractures!
The final stages of treatment! The treatment of abscesses!
The application of the bandage!
The application of the splint!
The application of the splint!
The application of padding!
The application of the bandage!
The extension of the splint!
The final steps!
The final verdict!
The final words!
The importance of proper treatment!
The timeline of recovery!
The final chapter!
The restoration of the fracture of the deltoid!
The nature of deltoid fractures!
The nature of deltoid fractures (continued)!
The restoration of the deltoid fracture!
The final steps!
The final consideration!
The final chapter!
The restoration of the fracture of the leg!
The anatomy of the leg!
The types of fractures in the leg!
The consequences of two bones being fractured together!
The consequences of the subtler bone being fractured!
The consequences of the thicker bone being fractured!
The final instructions!
The final words!
The final instructions for the leg!
The final wrapping instructions!
The final instructions for the stars!
The final instructions for the leg!
The final message!
The final words of wisdom!
The final chapter!
The fracture of the ankle and foot bones!
The fracture patterns of the ankle and foot!
The instructions for treating a fractured foot!
The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
The instructions for treating fractured toes! The instructions for treating a fractured toe!
The instructions for treating multiple toe fractures!
The final instructions!
The final chapter!
The final chapter!
The treatment of a fractured cranium in a female!
The treatment of a fractured cranium in a female (continued)!
The treatment of a fractured cranium in a female (continued)!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions for the treatment of fractures in men!
The final chapter of the book!
The final chapter!
The importance of proper treatment when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
The importance of controlling the bleeding when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
The importance of prompt treatment when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
The importance of patience when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
The importance of reducing and equalizing the fractured bone when it is prominent above the skin!
The importance of using the right tools and techniques when treating fractures!
The importance of precision and control when performing surgical procedures!
The importance of careful consideration when making decisions!
It seems we've reached the end of the text!
The final phrase!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final instruction!
The final phrase!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
It seems we've reached the final chapter (Capitol) of the ancient text!
The title of the 20th chapter!
The start of the 20th chapter!
The author is providing guidance on how to treat the swelling (nodacio) that has occurred after a bone fracture.
The author is providing additional guidance on how to treat the swelling (nodacio) that has occurred after a bone fracture.
The author is providing guidance on how to treat the swelling (nodacio) that has become inflamed and hardened.
The title of the 21st chapter!
The title of the 21st chapter!
The text continues to discuss the reasons why a fractured bone may not be restored to its natural state, even after healing.
The text continues to provide guidance on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture.
The text continues to provide guidance on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture.
The title of the 22nd chapter!
The title of the 22nd chapter!
The text continues to provide guidance on how to promote healing after a bone fracture.
The text takes a critical tone towards certain medical practitioners and restorers.
The text continues to provide guidance on how to treat fractures and related conditions.
The text provides guidance on how to treat fractures and related conditions.
The text provides guidance on how to treat fractures and related conditions.
The title of the 23rd chapter!
The title of the 23rd chapter!
The text begins to discuss the topic of dislocation.
The text emphasizes the importance of prompt reduction in cases of dislocation.
The text warns against delaying the reduction of dislocation during the acute phase.
The text provides guidance on how to treat dislocation when it occurs.
The text emphasizes the importance of proper care for the entire affected limb.
The text concludes by summarizing the chapters on dislocation.
The final chapter!
The final chapter is about the treatment of a dislocation of the jawbone (mandible) from below.
The final chapter provides guidance on how to treat a dislocation of the jawbone (mandible) from below.
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The next chapter!
The next chapter!
The text continues!
The text continues! The text continues!
The text continues!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The next chapter!
The next chapter!
The text begins to describe the different ways in which a muscle can be dislocated.
The text continues to describe the different ways in which a muscle can be dislocated.
The text continues to describe the characteristics of muscle dislocation.
The text continues to describe the effects of muscle dislocation.
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions!
The final instructions! The final sentence!
The final method!
The final remedy!
The final instruction!
The final step!
The final position!
The final instructions!
The final advice!
The final conclusion!
The final statement!
The final warning!
The final instruction!
The final prescription!
The final advice!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final statement!
The final warning!
The final restoration!
The final nuance!
The final resort!
The final confirmation!
The final detail!
The final push!
The final rest!
The final release!
The final iteration!
The final touches! The final treatment! Corruption has already occurred within the bone marrow instrument before it is linen-wrapped.
The final touch!
The final chapter!
The final sentence!
The final warning!
The final reduction!
The final consideration!
The final warning!
The final words!
The final instructions!
The final advice!
The final chapter!
The final words!
The final sentence!
The final instruction!
The final words!
The final words!
The final instruction!
The final words!
The final sentence!
The final chapter!
The final words!
The final warning!
The final words!
The final sentence!
The final warning!
The final words!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence! The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
The final sentence!
It looks like we've reached the end of the book!
The title of the next section!
The text is making some important distinctions!
The text is describing the different types of dislocations that can occur in the hip joint!
The text is emphasizing that the hip joint is most commonly dislocated inwards (towards the body), rather than outwards or backwards.
The text is describing a symptom of hip dislocation!
The text is describing another symptom of hip dislocation!
The text is describing another symptom of hip dislocation!
The text is describing another symptom of hip dislocation!
The text is discussing the reduction of dislocation!
The text is discussing the reduction of dislocation in recent cases!
The text is discussing alternative methods for reducing dislocation!
The text is describing the extension of the hip joint!
The text is describing the extension of all those in one go, until the patient is elevated to their full height and remains suspended!
The text is stating that this type of extension is common to all four types!
The text is stating that if the dislocation returns to its original state after treatment, then it's good; but if not, then additional measures are necessary for each specific type of dislocation!
The text is describing the reduction process for hip dislocation!
The text is describing the reduction process for hip dislocation, continued!
The text is stating that this type of reduction is the easiest and most straightforward way to cure hip dislocation!
The text is describing an alternative approach if the patient is not willing to follow the instructions for this type of reduction!
The text is describing the length of each foot and the extent of the affected hip!
The text is describing the patient's position and the length of their leg!
The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation!
The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation when it occurs on the outside!
The text is describing the setup for reducing a hip dislocation!
The text is describing the final step in reducing a hip dislocation!
The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation when it occurs in front!
The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation when it occurs in back!
The text is describing the application of compression!
The text is describing the final steps of reducing a hip dislocation!
The text is describing the final step of reducing a hip dislocation!
The text is describing the final confirmation of a successful reduction!
The text is describing a situation where the patient may still require further treatment!
The text is describing the final step of patient recovery!
It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
The title of the chapter!
A final summary!
The final sign of hip dislocation!
The final steps of treatment!
The final sign of reduction!
The final steps of treatment!
The final advice!
The final twist!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final details!
The final sign!
The final cure!
The final guidance!
The final instructions!
The final movement!
The final repetition!
The final push!
The final conclusion!
The final instruction!
The final details!
The final application of the technique!
The final step!
The final caution!
The final instruction!
The final prohibition! The final warning!
The final note!
The final chapter!
The final section!
The final guidance!
The final instruction!
The final adjustment!
The final steps!
The final chapter!
The final topic!
The final warning!
The final wisdom! The final effort!
The final administration!
The final treatment!
The final exhortation! The final blessing! The final "Amen"!
