O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine, along with its fulfillment, and I have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, so the science is lost and concealed, and nothing remains of it except the little descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have made.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise, according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together with the forms of the irons of cauterization, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement and rest of the veins, both moving and resting, and from their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this Hippocrates said that the name is not much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and we put our hands on the art
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should be careful so that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	so that I have seen many of those who undertake this science and if they abandon their own science and their own experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into the abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries near the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen it called for by the traitor, and seen the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one touches it he dies.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break an open wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctors complained of ignorance holding the break on the wound by strong binding, and did not let the wound breathe at all, and they left it thus for a term;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he ordered that it not be untied;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and it remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot, and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had it untied, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all along the corrupted area was confirmed on the member, and not the part to heal;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and did not stop the corruption from spreading through the member until the member became completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And we see another case where the abscess bursts the swollen apostume, and then becomes inflamed due to the malignancy of its symptom.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a tumor, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require anything but to be touched with iron if it is in the right place where one can then remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, a place where there is danger in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which reason it is necessary that you take care of yourselves, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take your arms in consistency, and undertake your ills lightly and firmly, and make use of the better way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let go of the diseases that bring grief and bad health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and put away from you that which makes you doubt, and have faith in you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says distant from some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take in hand a bad illness, lest you be called foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about cauterizations of fire and also about cauterizations of sharp medicine, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of burnings, and of the cauterizations by fire, and of all that which is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of ulcers and of wounds, and of the extractions of arrows, and of similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and this chapter is ordered and are the forms of the burnings.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring the dislocations and the distortions, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered concerning the high joints of the feet, and the forms of the burnings.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Although we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of this speaking many of the wise men agree;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and my breath is scarce for their words, for I dread the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say, a hot and moist complexion, and a dry and moist complexion.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion with mixed matter, they disagreed among themselves and said that cautery is of great aid;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is not suitable for an illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a hot illness with heat, nor with dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and it is said by those who say the opposite that cautery provides great aid to hot and dry illnesses that occur in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And let no one interfere with it except he who has experienced it, and who knows through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of the tension;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no fear, similarly in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the members assemble and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cauterization is one of the secrets of the cures, and of greater goodness than cauterization of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not come except to the member which is burned, and does not harm another member unless by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines come from one member to another by touching, and bring to the sick member the diseases of grievous sanitation;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire through its height and through the goodness of its substance does not do this, if it is not in excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I reveal to you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and choose taking pains.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harmful effects which supervene are easily cured by the aid of the cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and meanwhile the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the illness that is healed by cauterization has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and they tell it to him;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not a medicine which alters the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the hastening of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and of its operation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes from the complex condition of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if not cauterized with fire where there is little excess and moisture, as for cauterizing dense areas for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but that happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterizing is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterizing is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizing is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterizing, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	It then appears clearly that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not in accordance with the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterizations with instruments of gold are less damaging than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold and the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the application of cauterization does not cause putridity, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauterizations of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they praised them.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And however when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	it becomes discolored from the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus it has enough impediment
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cauterization that we have shown to be suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have organized this chapter from head to foot, because it makes the journey easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	for cauterizing the olive tree
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are good for moisture and for cold on the head, and they are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to a multitude of songs and pain in the teeth and throat pain, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cauterization is such that the patient should be purged with a medicine that cleanses the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and the age and the habit of the patient can endure;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient rest their head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make them sit with their arms crossed between your hands, and put their hands under their armpits;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and take your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from inside then heat the cautery that is called "olivare", whose form is this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the marked place from inside, and make it descend and constrict your hand little by little turning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone a little swollen;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	afterwards take a little wax, and put it in warm cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After a dead body has been placed in a grave;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it stay there until the cold has removed the stiffness;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the wound of the joint that is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old ones said, that the more one keeps the wound covered, the more it purges;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason it is helped by movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should cauterize so much on the bone, and strike it so forcibly that one removes from the bone as wide a piece as the buckle that women put on their belts, because the humors issue freely outside;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must let the wound remain covered for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that, one must cure and cauterize.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two kinds of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in every way, except for certain men in whom there is a vein of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it to the surgeon;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by continuous discharges of a natural kind, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and myself, when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems more healthy and beneficial to me, and for that reason I observe in the end a healthy outcome.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the pain in the old head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in the whole head there comes chronic pain, and it lasts for a long time, then the patient should use roots and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if they do the cauterization that we mentioned earlier, it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the sick person's arm is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize the one who has been burnt a little, as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards do cauterization on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and do the cauterization on the place that is called "vasels".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the place where one puts a poultice.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and put your hand so that you do not feel all the way to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patients feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of them elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head there comes sudden pain, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicines that cleanse, and one has done the other treatments that I have spoken of in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit at all:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then one must make cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with hot medication and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauteries of hot medication are that you take a handful of herbs, and remove the bark and take a little of the head, and then apply it to the temple where the pain is held in such a manner that you can place the handful of herbs under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it has been applied, bind it and constrain it well and leave it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then untie and treat with the doctrine of oil, and leave the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on a plaster cast in butter until it can be recognized as bone.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of unction as long as it is healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that I have written about certain burning medications or the treatment of burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery made from iron, for that is its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle it has a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little gently, until the half of the spear head is burnt;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and raise your hand so that the artery does not become hardened, which is defective, and remove excess blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards put cotton in a warm water bath, and apply it to the limb for three hours;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moistened cotton in a poultice, and then treat the limb with ointment until it is healthy;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", to the very tip, and beware of touching the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migration as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous statements of medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and show thus on the painful limb a line of half a thumb's length, and lift your hand once, and hold tight that you do not touch the artery and that you do not come close to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for what moves and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the evacuation of blood from the artery when it is touched, where touching it has great fear and shame for the one who does not know it, and who is not a studied and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work in the middle of the way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two edges;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and it is a better cautery than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears caused by cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around the two where the pain is held in both, and a little below the root of the ear since you have marked the place of the injection;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and have ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure, leave the limb alone as long as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not fiercer than those which move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the illness;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauterization on similarities that come from bloody flux and from spitting of kidneys.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this type of torture that moves with phlegm of kidneys and purging of head and gargling, and it is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cauterization in the part that opens cleanly, and have it cauterized directly on the head of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery stay on as long as the pain of the heart is eased;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the cutellaire that we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure of the limb as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the case of apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the member called "vassel" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient great and powerful pills that purify the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	afterwards anoint the head of the patient all over, and apply to the back of the head a plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the book of plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy; it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, then have three cauterizations made on the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space of one finger between each cauterization;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and cure him like the others, and if you see him often, and the patient is suffering, then have one cauterization made in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and his profession is, one on the two horns, and the cure as long as he is healthy;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterer be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be anointed with herbs and with that which we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	afterwards anoint the head of the patient, then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and on the back and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you are in a similar profession, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the most painful spot is scarred, and raise your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment until he is healthy, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics must not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment with herbs and other cures that we have mentioned in the section when the patients are great and suffering from a lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, have them gargle and chew modifying the brain often with good meat broths;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king has made a thousand, and have it cauterized according to what we said before, and cauterize on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and suffering, have them cauterized as I said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be cauterized with olivier according to the method that I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a woman, then make for her a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy the superfluities or the corrupt humors and gross phlegm are, then the cautery of hot irons as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give to drink a thing by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is stated in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After that, examine the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after make a bandage well done, like a circle, and put it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should be cross-wise, and held firmly on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after apply the plaster, and take care to cover with old barberry butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and let it warm at moderate fire, so that one can boil the pus to make it suffer;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after having seen the circle from within in the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient each week once with another good governance, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that it is necessary to cauterize, make many points on the entire cauterized area.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This type of cauterization resembles a brain in equilibrium;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on it cotton moistened in butter and in fat of goose.
de l’awe des eulz	from the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then give and let the patient drink something warming the head, and the guard against all humidity, and make them sweat with baths many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After instructing him to shave his head, and having cauterized in the middle of the head, and having made two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of the brain is with the two eyes together, or where one descent is in one eye;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and let the cautery reach all the veins and arteries that are close to the brain, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop immediately with a cloth.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the cutting of the cautery how you will stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes a cautery is made or a splint put behind the two bones;
dou cors des larmes	tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head before;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is from cold and phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatment on the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or branding irons under the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is more swollen, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	a flux of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give the patient three drinks of warm potions;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king's head, and make a cauterization in the middle with an olive-tree cauterizer;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizations with the cauterizer called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery that is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	because of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that there are two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let go of it with your hand unless until the third part of the parchment is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into a membrane, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient that they should let the hairs grow as long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	afterwards mark on the skin of the eyes a figure that should be as wide as the width of the middle finger, and let the beginnings of the sign be among the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put moist cotton in a glass of oil and anoint the eyelid with the juice of periwinkle on the eye, then heat the cauterization instrument to the form that it is:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Afterwards cauterize on the figure that you have marked little by little several times, so that the vessels are burned in that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs raised to the point of the nail;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three hours, then put moist cotton in a poultice as long as the numbness is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of dislocation until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And after the skin becomes calloused, and the hairs grow, then the skin is softened, afterwards recommence the cauterization on the same spot, as you did previously;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the skin is elevated to its natural state, and is even, and does not press on the hairs of the nail.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medical cauterizations with burning are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and living ashes, of each one a half ounce, and mix them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and apply it quickly, so that it does not get cold, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of a myrtle, and put some on the papier of the eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness holds in one eye or the other, one should open it, and if in both then also;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put two cotton threads moistened with oil of rue into the opening;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the patient be in your hand and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the hole and rub the mouth every time the patient feels a biting sensation from the medicine, for it feels like a biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have held it in place for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the morification will be passed, if the limb is lifted from the water, and examine it if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then apply again the medicine on the limb or where the medicine did not work, until your operations are even, and your eyes are set to the point;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on cotton moistened in broth until the bitter heart is cooled, after cure the limb of the joint which is called "diafonis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you take care well of your work with great care so that it does not happen that the point of the medicine reaches the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then reapply the medicine on that limb which is softened by the skin properly, thus as you have done before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment until he is healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and it is the shape of the abscess of the dead flesh:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And it is known that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this will be their constrictions;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the right way be hidden from him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it bend its neck;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards put moist cotton on the vein or in the juice of melilot on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the cautery which is applied:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped to the head like the form of a wing of a shoulder, together with which is the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it should be also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this is what is shaped for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula, it is covered, and in drawing out the pus, and the dryness;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed, thus the work, and draw out the fluid from the belly;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after putting on the cautery hot ferment, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the kidney near the navel, so that your hands do not cause harm;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the navel, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery near the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then restart the cautery once more, and also if you are a professional at it, and let it be for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After I apply a moist cotton cloth to the area, and treat the joint with a dissolving ointment until it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then apply a caustic medicine as long as the bone is covered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and let it be governed according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Cut into the fistula, and make the place;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After put in the incision a thin iron instrument of which this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make an amount of a kind of poultice;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold the hand or wrist firmly, and do not move the patient's joint, so that the applied poultices do not go to their eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a moist cotton in a basin of warm water or in a bath:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the poultice if applied near the place of the fistula, and the sound part by miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the navel, and to bring the fistula to the body of the navel according to what is proper for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur cracks on the lips that are called "poil", and similarly on the lips of infants.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of the bone that we have spoken of in divisions, and the treatment is not beneficial, then heat up a small cautery iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it hastily into those cracks until it comes to a flow;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, anoint the limb with cerote until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and decay and it becomes swollen and develops into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron comes to the flow of it, and cauterize the area;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is thus cured, it's good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then you should uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then put the head of the patient in your healthy;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cauterization tool whose shape will be described later, in such a way that you put a chain on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the hot cauterization tool between the teeth hastily, and hold it as long as your hand can, so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After lifting your hand and restarting the cauterization according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after the patient has filled his mouth with salty water, and holds it for an hour and spits out frequently.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in the same way the teeth that were loose are confirmed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the rotten moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or decay, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cauterization with borings and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with borings is such that you take borings of a cow, and put the tip in an iron or steel spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, and moistening it in hot borings, and putting it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And thus do often as the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are wet in cold broth, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron so that the pus comes to the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries together with fire are such that you grasp an iron or copper chain, and it is so large that the pus does not come to the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	after heating the cautery, from which the abscess will come out after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	do this often, for the pain will be lessened that day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good cold broth in the application of this cautery, and then pull it back;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And perform cautery on whichever part of the head you wish, and according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and it is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula are of phlegm and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery applied to that place from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the humors to issue from the cautery of the other part;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or it is a second task, until it comes to the source of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small then put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on cotton moistened with butter until the abscess is discharged;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure of the limbs and of tendons until it be healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the shoulder:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the humors prevail over the channels of the wrist, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be treated first with solvent medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after he has undergone cautery to the root of the throat, and beware that you not come near the throat, and do not kindle the heart except a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After he has undergone another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be which is called "clavicle" from which we have the form in front;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the limb as we have said before until it be healthy.
de la toust	Of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and the disease of lungs are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is a chronic disease, have two cauterizations on the chest in the veins;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery in the breast between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery be that which is called "clavicle" according to the form that was mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery that is called "poins" of which the form was mentioned before in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the poins be just to thirty, or within that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the cure of the back according to what was said before, and let the cauterizations be at three ribs according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, the cauterizations are made lighter, because you make three of them at one time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards the patients are swollen on their back and on their sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after that, raise the heart which is within the diaphragm with your left hand fingers;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the cauterization which has two nerves where it is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as long as it penetrates to the side, and the figure of the cauterization comes together with four cauterizations;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason it is made with the cautery that has III nerves, because the figure of cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted on this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the cautery, burn with a flax seed or a flake;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after make the patient rest, and not move the limb by long tension as long as it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little matter that has happened, then make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is dried and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come chills and a lot of moisture as it stretches to its complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and in manners of accustomed treatments he does not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Of this, afterwards make three cauterizations on the skin of the leg for the quantity of an egg, on all the curved cautery, and two cauterizations on the two sides as long as the figure of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have a space between one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will suppurate;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery be so deep that it pierces the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a cauterization of a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of the thickness;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize all the cauterization that is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the wound that we had in front, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When to the liver comes pain of cold and of moisture and of great windiness, as long as it is made foul from its natural complexion by the superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, thus it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his liver;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, against the hypochondries, where the pain of the sides or the pain of the loins comes;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and has a space between each cauterization the thickness of a finger
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterization be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it be so slightly the size of the heart, and let the patient stand upright on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him be seated, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauterizations of the cutaneous layer, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to boiling, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and one should be cautious to see;
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, he feels a very sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment of the abscesses is done, it is necessary that the patient be supported under his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then mark with a sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a razor, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize the cautery as much as the area is burned, and come up to the sphincter, as much as the perineum is entirely cauterized;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of the abscesses until he is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cauterization except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been corrected many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can hardly work, and still it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	against cauterizing the pleura or lung tissue
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must perform cauterization on the lungs using roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, the largest possible, and let it be dry, and let its thickness and length be that of your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and mix it with oil, and apply it to the fire, and perform the cauterization between the shoulder and the neck, and perform two small cauterizations slightly descending on the area beneath the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and apply cauterization between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and apply one cauterization in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest opposite the cauterization which is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but make it open as if in a fragrance.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And certain ancients said that no man should use the fire cauterization similar to a razor, and they warmed it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and the pain will disappear, as we have said in the case of the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula will come which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the worm
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the knee that we have spoken of in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit from them, then there are three manners of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	One of the manners is that you make three or four cauteries, applying them along the length of the knee, according to the shape of the cautery of the foot that we have spoken of before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be seated behind his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is near the knee, or where the cold of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After that, inflate the two nerves as much as the heart is perceived from the other side, and then apply the cauterization, and thus in this way there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that it is necessary to cauterize all three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been acquired by long tension, and this is more useful than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for someone with dropsy, except in the manner that is called "ascarides" or "ascites" being referred to as  «asclytes» likely meaning ascites, a condition of dropsy.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment is not beneficial, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the right side of the chest.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterization be well applied to the thickness of the scar.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cauterized area uncovered for a long time to drain the purulence, and do not hinder the healing of the wound after the cauterization;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and the healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be joined together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cauterization on the abdomen is the clavele that we have previously shown;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that which is for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been set forth before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of watery citrine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cauterization without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus would be the exterior of the citrine area, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, apply on both thighs two cauterizations, one on each thigh at the tip of the culellatier area;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauterizations be from the length, one of them beneath the knee in front and the other behind, on the middle of the thigh;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations to burn for a long time without covering, so that the area becomes dry;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the meniscus
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a looseness of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines becomes weak, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering and of strong virtue, make the great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or the cauterization of the stomach, in circular cauterization.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four subtle cauterizations around the navel for every subtle cauterization of the spine, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the muscles abundant and the patient suffering, make a cauterization on the nail, and one cauterization on each heel, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the navel, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or several, and are ancient and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are curable as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit unless cauterizations are made:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, there is a cauterization which is all deformed and rough, little by little in a triangular shape, and the fire cauterization is on the navel for two fingers;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swollen, then one applies a large cauterization on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauterizations being applied;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cauterization remain on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, leave it alone until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the weakness which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut into the callus, heat up the cauterization that seems suitable, and then apply it all burnt on the cut callus;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand be so that the cautery iron comes to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do it once or twice, and if there is much of the humour, then cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of profitable members as long as they are healthy;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the Achilles tendon, it will have more benefit.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or surgical opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes fistula, and it is inflamed and irritated by purulent matter and corrupted humours, then examine thoroughly with a subtle touch, and take care that you know the entire depth of the fistula.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After applying the cautery that seems to raise the hair, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tendon has entered, and renew the cautery as long as those rotten and corrupted bodies are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of the sore's need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and protect the nerves that are in danger, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, protect those places, and do not make those sores that are in the flesh raw, and think that it is not a perforating.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after curing the flesh as long as it is healthy, and if the sores are suppurating, and the matters are thrust out for a long time, then consider that the sore is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matters are not thrust out, think that the sore is rotten, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus like one of these things that we will tell about in its place
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and of great swelling, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cauterization that we have previously mentioned;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we perform the cauterizations in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be of greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and cold from moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform cauterization on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin to grow, and to the right and to the left, and let each cauterization be as long as a finger;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and have them apply the cautery on the back, or if you are in a need of it;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauteries be applied to the collarbone according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for this reason to conceive, and the flesh is corrupted and their terms are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to have three cauteries made around the belly, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauteries be applied to the collarbone, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous humors descend to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the limbs of the department are visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the flank to a cautery similar to the circle, and sign in front of the limb around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauteries are such that one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present, make three cauteries of the large olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the hearts;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the flank
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the box of the flank, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is not effective, and the illness is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick foul humors of stinky pills, or other similar bad pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you have done the cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of doing the cauterization is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, applying burning medicines together, and cauterizing with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Cauterization with fire is according to many methods, of which one is the following:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the box of the ankle three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cauterization a space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one does a cauterization in the middle on the head of the ankle, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see that the cautery of the circle which we have previously mentioned regarding the dislocation of the thigh;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the parts of the heart are raised.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way one treats sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and does not reach either the knee or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the knee and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a little;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauteries be applied with caution, and let the parts of the heart be raised with artistry;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near the navel, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is a trade, then one does more of it;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then perform cautery with a circular or ring-shaped cautery iron, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the leg near the foot, and left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the foot as well, and was pierced through and corrupted all the way to the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a intestinal rupture from which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two places together, perform cautery in one and in the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said in the cautery of the thigh, that this is the manner, make the iron tool and let it be as thick as a nutmeg seed, or a little less, and let it be notched and let one notch go into another with the space of a thumb;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the notches be open on both sides, and let them also be like nuts, and let the iron hand be well made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and let the patient feel its heat, and then apply it to the diseased thigh, and let it be turned around the sore area;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let the cautery be applied once and let it stay for three hours;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound stay covered for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the injury as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the danger of its application, and few see those who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless these are good cauteries, which one can endure, and where they are beneficial.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The medical cauteries are such that you make the instrument to insert between the lips of the wound, and it should be of copper or iron with a long edge, and in height two nails, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a finger;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and are open at top and bottom, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After that put on the bandage of the thigh to the patient sitting on his healthy side, and press your hand much on the bandage of the thigh;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After the injury between the two circles of the warm water that has been heated by the fire a little, and let it be for an hour of ten, and the patient suffers from heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he finds mortification as if from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the mortification has passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the edge of the warm water, and let it be for three hours, and put on a poultice as long as that which is black from the scab falls off;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it be for three hours that the pus comes out in a stream;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of unctions as long as he is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, have made an instrument that holds water according to what you have done on the injured limb;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and it is the manner of the hot water, and I have written it in a treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline substance and living lime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or it has a small hole made so that the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put that pot into another well-plugged pot, and put on it alkaline substance and lime and sweet water, as much as you will have the powders well ground when you have grasped it with your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it be so until the water descends and the pot is unplugged, then take all that water, and pour it on the lime and on the alkaline substance as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical treatments and in cauterizations of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the work of fire, and if with other medicines that one cauterizes well the ankle thus as thesis and meal anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured of the pain of the ankle and of the sciatic vein, and he loved it much, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And says in such manner that you take green fresh and dry litharge, and crush it much with a bit of grease, and put it on the ankle and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And be aware that one should not use cauterization of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a fiery cautery, it helps a great deal;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cauteries should be done in the same manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the wool and the extract of old oil, and apply it to the fissure which is between the hollow of the foot and the other which is called the heel.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Afterwards take dry cauterizing iron, and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal, and apply it to the wool, and let it stay until it is cooled.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and redo this again, and do not stop doing this as long as you think it is necessary until it comes to the thigh, and that the pain be eased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this type of cauterization is called "cauterization of the lip".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by falling or by percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar things of cold matter spread, none of these things is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after that, that the patient be treated with foul-smelling pills or other similar things, that one apply to their back, there where the pain is, three lined marks of incision, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And let the cauterization be done according to the cauterization that is called "poins".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see it, do three or four cauterizations on the middle clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes to little children, and the signs of the affliction are that they have a constricted arm when they lift themselves, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes from the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you consider it to be cured, then cauterize it with the cauterization of that member according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	Thus the cauterization affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, then cauterize around the spine with the cauterization that pricks two or three lines, and let the points be near one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the injury as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in a place where there are nerves in danger of being damaged.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the physicians call "podagra" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in such a manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a spot where you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization at the entire area that one calls a "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then one should perform cauterization on each knee three or four times, with olive oil for all the cauterizations.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you are a master of many things, do more, but do not hold back your hand more than necessary so that the pressure of the instrument is gentle.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend near the knees and to the back, administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains a point of pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come near the ribs or near the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and think of medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make a good government for yourself and purge the phlegm, you will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes to the entrails, and the bowels descend to the groin and it is new, then it is necessary that when you want to cure it, that you do not touch that member today;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things which lighten the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his belly as long as the bowels are being repaired, and put them back in place, and sign from below the rupture on the bone of the hip, and make a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery according to what its form is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are bald and throw away sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the intestines to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and let the assistants hold his hand so that it does not turn back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and a servant on the thighs, and another on his chest who holds his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommend it again another time until you come to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and beware subtly that the intestine does not protrude when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that because of this the patient does not die, or have other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not apply the fire to the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is fitting that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the measure of their ears, and for large people also large according to their measurement;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days cure the limb from the cautery of tar until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after curing other ulcers until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days while the wound is well dried;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is fitting that his bandages be tied loosely, so that the belly does not swell when he gets up to go to the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made splint should be applied to him, and the poultice for another 40 days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let it have good rest, so that it works little and guards against too great a filling of drinking and eating, and of too high a fever.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he makes this teaching then is health entirely.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will speak afterwards of the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow more, then have made the cautery of the cautery repeated according to its quantity, and let it be the third of the heart;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the limit of the flesh and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in the middle to all the cauterized claw.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of pain in old age in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, from a fall or a blow, and that pain holds for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a cautery which is called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torsions and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healed by the first cauterization, that's good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if that does not work, recommend another cauterization on that one, for such is the custom that it must change in the member which is affected, therefore it is necessary that you do the cauterizations as long as the patient is not healed.
de meselerie	of mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The doctors are helped many times by cautery with great aid, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see the need to cauterize, beware that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is curable according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the whole disease, then make a cautery on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	Put one cautery on the head at the navel, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the occipital bone;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand be such that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and as long as the scorchings issue forth so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and the cauterization on the mouse according to what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mixture is scattered all around;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it falls manifestly, then you should apply the cauterization of these cauterizations that we have mentioned in the head, and one cauterization on the nape of the neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the thigh, and another below it, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and of the feet, and on the palms of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calf, that you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more it aids him, and moves him to profit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cauterization as much as they think they do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the cases.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, anoint the limb with flour of wheaten bread and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes into any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then have cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be a little within the thickness of the skin;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cauterization is performed on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is reduced;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in no way should one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of paralysis
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "paralysis" has invaded, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then cauterization with a cautery is performed somewhat deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then heal with flour of roots and with lenses using rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colchicum and blood of almonds, each a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be wrapped altogether, and be tied with a cloth, and be raised to the level as long as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cauterizing iron which seems a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise men said that one should do cauterization in the middle of the cancer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the most rightful thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some people have a disease called «adubelati», and it slows down their urine or because of the excess that it produces or because of the pain of the disease when it is decrepit (that is to say too old) and they have little blood, or because of their tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you hasten the stoppage of urinating:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then one cauterizes within many small cauterizations by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after that, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten the stoppage of urinating.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you hasten to pierce all the cauterization, heat the cauterizer from where its form is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called «adubelati» until the cauterizations have pierced the heart, and let the cauterizations be such that the patient feels better in some manner so that the course of the disease is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by means of iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is what is called "corrosion", and it is nothing other than a wasting away of a member, for it wastes the members just as fire does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a patient who can suffer cauterization with fire, then heat the cauterizing irons very little and greatly, according to what is needed for the patient or where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cauterization of all parts as long as you eradicate all the corruption, and do not leave any of it, that all that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and apply to the cauterized limbs a soothing balm made with oil, until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of painful gums produces fever.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see that after three days a healthy gum does not grow, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if it does not, then repeat the cauterization on that which has remained of the rotten flesh.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this swelling has sometimes been cured by sharp medicine instead of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already spoken of the cure by sharp medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take what you have in your profession.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of stones that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that in the feet by default arises a disease which is called "cloches" according to our intention, and is a large false body that blocks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations of this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know about cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Cautery of fire is that you heat I, the cautery iron, as is a pen of hollow metal, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after you put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay thus three hours until it induces a purulent discharge;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a plaster of wild mallows bruised with oil, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wounded limb by anointing with heat until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are affected by various humors in the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization of warm water.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in a similar manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a chain of iron or of steel, or a needle of a spearhead, and put it on the nail and the elbow, that is to remove warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the chain on it so that it embraces all around, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning it so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and then find the warm water passing deep to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the warm water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself completely along with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one thing after another, as long as you treat all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds that produce fever.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some people shiver from cold or from nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is suitable that you do four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cauterization;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if it leaves the trembling, and hastens the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of festering pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Some times appear on the body boils, or festering pimples, that come from corrupted thick matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is suitable at first when they appear that one do cauterization on each head of the pimple:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cauterization of the skin with a pointed instrument heated by fire, or with the root of aristolochia longa, or with a lentical cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when it appears, in this manner, and it cannot grow from the wounds beforehand, but is broken up the excess flesh that comes from them, and they are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the cut artery that come from the wound in the armpit, or from the incision of an abscess, or from cauterization of a limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grievous thing to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And always when that happens to someone, if you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and strain a lot so that the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and does not come out anymore;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put to the fire the olive cauteries many small and large as they are well roasted red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take I, either large or small according to the wound and the place in which the artery is broken, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it still flows when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is not effective, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stanched;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not injure the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and be aware that when the blood does not flow from the artery, one cannot well restore it, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tightening of a thread, or by medications applied which have the power to restore blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and let it be bound and constricted firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	For one will not profit from binding a tight bandage or placing warm things on, or other similar things, if not much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is restored above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the [affected] part, but rather apply cold moisture often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and restrained;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about what is needed for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	In this book the second section deals with the treatments of the thigh
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have said in the first chapter all about the disease for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicines, and the tools and causes and instruments and forms of cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I placed that chapter concerning the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it easier what one desires.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin with this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauterizations, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if there come those who are so accustomed to their illness that they move lightly because of the familiarity they have with their disease, and the greatness of their suffering;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one should be afraid of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And to this one who gives his opinion, and says:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am a leper";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is contemptible.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It does not matter that you consent to those who come to you with this condition, but put greater consideration in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely regarding that which you are certain of, and that which you can have taken and gained.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what it is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have divided for you from head to feet, so that you find more easily that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of anguish
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	It is known that this illness often comes to infants at birth, and when the midwife holds the head of the infant too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it occurs without any apparent reason that one knows.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness except in infants, and most of those whom I have seen hasten their death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth including the treatment in several cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw an infant whose head was full of anguish, and the head grew so large every day that it could not be supported;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture increased so much that it became a tumor, and this tumor is assembled below the bone on the spine, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the works are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make in the head a wide incision;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two of us, until the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see to the form of the spatula or spoon;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is disordered in the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head are open on each side, and the water jumps when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to treatment:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely from outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After constraining the fractures of bandages and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave them like that until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then undo it, and treat the wound with dressings and with anointments, and let the head be constrained, and give to eat to the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another manner of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess, and the gathering of the pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes it is behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes it is on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes it is on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then the place where the abscess appears, and the filling of the pus, and make the incision according to that which you have the power;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and stop the flow of blood, so that the patient dies from lack of blood and from evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and the treatment with medicine is of no benefit, then the last resort is cauterization with what one cuts the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, then, when you cut the veins, that the patient make his head fall back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the limb with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck against the entire cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein is visible, and the limbs of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly raised;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the limbs from the beginning, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula on both sides, as far as the vertebrae reaches to the bone, and that which is through the wide wound of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, remove the spatula from beneath the artery and cut above, carving just as the two veins across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then let the blood flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear to feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark from the beginning and make until the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and that which is necessary to put blood flowing if it is six and a fraction, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone a pointed syphac, if the abscess does not heal, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emigraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and sharp caterization, because of the moistures of tears and the heat on the temples and old forehead weakness and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and all that does not profit him, then we cauterize the arteries of the temples and do the cauterization, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of the extraction of them is that the patient makes to raise the hairs of his temples, and attend to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly found outside in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is replaced, then remove the patient's neck from certain bandages, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth, and raise the limb with warm water as long as the artery appears manifestly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scratch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and separate it well from the tendons that are attached to each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is subtle, then turn it at the point of the nail, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then know that the blood does not stop at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And let the blood flow for six hours, up to three times;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong double silk thread, which will prevent it from coming undone before the closure of the wound, and will come to be stopped by the blood;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then remove the excess hair that is between the two lips in that same hour, and then, if you see it, if the cautery of the cautery iron has reached the bone as long as the head is removed;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is the mother of work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauteries are helped in finishing the ulcers:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater aid to the ulcers.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or it is necessary for the extraction of the arteries that one fills the body with old cotton and puts it on well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when one removes them, let them be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healthy;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without cutting the artery as long as you work, if you have to cut with a knife by cautery, or you fill the body with vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the blood is congealed;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you don't have a remedy at hand, then put your finger on the spot until the blood is congealed, and raise the limb from cold water as long as the blood stops, and hold it steady as is necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more moderate in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting on both sides, but the cutting be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the extremities are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be between the two incisions one finger of space, and then when you have signed to enclose the two limbs, and you put the iron burning on until it comes near the bone, and cut the vein in two limbs;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and should be loosened between the two parts for it is not suitable to be tightened by this cautery everywhere.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on the outer skin of the head, and no medical treatment is beneficial, and you see the face of the patient become red, and feel the forehead with numbness as if from frost;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the eyes are tender and moist so that the hair of the papers is burned, and the papers are scorched, and charred by the heat of the tears, thus there is need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "bruised cure", and it is that you make on the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on the forehead, then make three equal cuts on the forehead according to its length;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the cuts be as if two fingers in the middle of the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the other two on either side of the head above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on either side of the head above the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and direct your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joint across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth for sucking the blood, then push the spitulum sharply with two parts of the body where it is in the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that is above the temple just to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two fissures to the entire surface which is on the bone, then make another cut of the middle incision just to the other second, and then extract this spitulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you push into the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very well cutting on one side, and on the other side is soft, not cutting, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the cauterized part cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and the cauterized part touching towards the bone, and the swelling as far as it comes to the middle split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision is continuous up to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle split up to the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract equally from the blood, and press the limb for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each split a piece of old cotton, and put on moistened cloths in wine and in oil and in vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day untie the linen, and apply a great plaster of hot water, then the treatment of the wound with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one cures wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Two remedies for the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When in any case one has an acute cataract with severe symptoms, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the sight weakened, and the eyelids scorched;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and the head is deeply pained with sharp pain, and the patient is in anguish;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you should know by these accidents that those matters and that cataract does not come from many veins, and the remedy is what it is, if it is so.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one two fingers wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and disengage your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then probe between the two lips of the wound and put in a lot of cotton, and bind with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then apply warm dressings moistened with wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is inflamed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as the flesh begins to grow, then treat it with caustic things, which cause flesh to grow.
En teil maniere:	In a similar way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of flowers of centaury, and four parts of colonchine, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply it to these wounds to induce flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Oats, or beasts, or stone from a mine or similar things such as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, like jasper, fava beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things such as sharpness and acids and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is a stone in the ear or another kind of thing that does not belong to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then distill a portion of violet oil or oil of cypress, then apply it for extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and have the person sneeze from the nostrils, and stop their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool in the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and stop the ear with wax.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times fever comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, then one must perform an extraction with subtle pincers, from which this is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out to the pincers, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then perform an extraction with a subtle hook of small doubles;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out by that, then make a thread of silver and push the head of the thread through the hole of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the thread with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the thread;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then pull it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in that manner, then take some glue and take the veins, and put some instrument which has a point for that purpose, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as well as the abscess is hot and swollen, and spasms;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the cutting is that you first let blood from the patient's head, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or dependent flesh;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be as wide as a coin, until you reach the stone, then extract the bone according to your power, and suck hastily with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then apply the spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with subtle pinces and with sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case then that there is a discharge in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a first dressing of conditioners, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them be placed on that same ear where the discharge is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it flows out by itself, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If this is not so, then take many stones according to the length of your hand and hold them lightly, and heat them a little by the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put the patient's finger in or through his ear, and rub on this side of his feet from another part, and make friction with one foot on the foot that is by the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop rubbing foot against foot until the disease has entirely gone, and thus the health is entirely restored;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see that, then take a reed, and put one of the ends in the ear, and the other end is pressed by fire until the hottest part of the reed is burnt;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do the same with other reeds until the disease has entirely gone, as we have said in the beginning.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of a beast, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large size so that one can feel it, then administer the extraction of splinters;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you perform the treatment as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment is not beneficial, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there appear no worms, then treat them as subtle splinters, and if they are not visible, then take the chain of what is its form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And put the thinnest part in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck firmly on all the chain;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff cotton into the cavity as I have said in the previous chapter;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not come out forcibly as we have said, then administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this equipment, of which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be of silver or of brass, straining through the small holes, and above, covers for distilling;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and for pressing within the distillation the instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you see take the rag and envelop it around the pointed end with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then put your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines into the cavity, and let the cane be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then thrust your fingers inside the armpit to the bottom of the socket, and press your hand firmly so that the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient feel inside, and let the distillation be heated by the fire in the same way that it is distilled in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have a passage in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men due to blockage of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes go deep into the ear, so that one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes it happens that the hole is stopped up, and one sees it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes from deep within, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in that which one sees, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opilation apparent, if the work has all this spatula from which is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting at the front and back all even, so that it does not harm the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the opilation is of flesh or body of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is all removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is deep within the ear, take a subtle rasp lightly and heat it a little by the fire, then put it into the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you suspect an obstruction where the patient feels pain in the ear, touch gently, and be careful not to press on the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a tent made from the width of the perforation, and the stopper in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this on no day when the wound is sore, or take a tent and the stopper in vinegar and rose water, and powder with burnt vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you pull out the tent and put in another moistened one made from a cerate of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is reduced;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, then dip a sponge in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that reduce the flow of blood which are described in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the pimples
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	It is a remedy that comes in pimples of the eyes when they are moist and dry, so you must stretch them with tweezers and pinces, and cut the head of a spatule from its roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the limb a glassy ointment spread.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not heal by itself, then the cauterization of subtle lenticy should be done with fire, and the cauterizer after the incision is of no value;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times repair, when none of these things remain at their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, then their roots are burned and do not regrow.
de la gresle	of the gum
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times there come in pimples of the eyes a thing that seems like gum in its form and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "gravel", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelid.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	it is necessary to know if the swelling changes on one side and the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	feel then the thickness of the skin, afterwards scratch off each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cut it without piercing a little the skin, do not grievously harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, then assemble it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for the organs will restore themselves at once and join together.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the swelling descends inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin, and stretch the swelling with pincers, and cut and press it on one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the plaster is removed by cutting, it does not cause any grief;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the stone is cut, if you raise the eyelid of the salty eye, and treat the limb of whoever urinates blood so much that the patient becomes healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that is discharged in threads from the skin of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to grown people, and causes them great pain in their eyes, and they get the discharge in the morning, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this reason they often lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are found to be moist with the discharge and the appearance that the exinach has covered the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb with your fingers and feel the excrescence between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hands;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a piece of linen, and prepare a dressing in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excrescence on each part, then put it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the excrescence is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture on the spatula a cutting edge of such width, and not more wide than the wound one makes on the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the flesh deep until you come to the excrescence;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many cases the excrescence comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract then a piece of cloth from the middle to the fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as long as it is sparse;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and beware that you do not put in the gap, that you do not reach the whole spatula to the hole, that you do not blow on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the gap, then increase the gap slightly until it appears;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and in water, and put on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if it is one of those men who break the seal and put on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscess comes to the wound, then cure with warm poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When in the papers hairs grow joined to other than their nature, and are inflamed, thus they harm the eyes, and bring many kinds of sickness such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the cure is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or with cauterization assembled fire, or with sharp medicine according to what is stated in the chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by branding, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your lap, then take the paper of the eye with your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then I push a needle to all the thread below;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be within the margin of the skin where the hairs grow among these hairs, and pull the thread to the bottom across all the skin, and turn it to the scraper;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the skin, below the hairs joined, all the spatula coping, from the large laceration to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and put below the skin a small piece of cotton and of cloth, then sign on the skin a figure of ink, such as the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the skin which is divided in pieces.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it happens that one must cut a large quantity of the skin according to that which the skin is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make on all the spatula along the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large wound to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let it be one of the natural cracks near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then cut the onion at one of the two angles of the heart, then scratch everything;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and all thread of subtle wool, and suck the blood, and make dry the excess threads on the two eyebrows with any sticky things, if you want to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then I have no cure, then leave the stitching and the threads until three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without stitching of dry and constricting things, for the skin will heal by itself due to the soothing of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitching is bad (as the ancients said), and this is a work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you show the parchment of a figure which is as the liver of the martyr, as we have related, to three ounces of the mixture according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then scrape off what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or thread, and put it in the middle of the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put another thread through the large arm, and the second thread through the small one, and join the two threads equally between them;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have made a sign, as we have related, then join the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healthy;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to a cutting, thus the dressing of wax and similar adjustments soothing;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and often it happens that the hair of the papillae are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you convert the papillae and the thread within according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the papillae and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly on what overcomes the papillae of the eye, and stretch the two wounds of the two parts forcibly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is held tight will die and become black and decay, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, if the wound has strong forces, then heal the skin as long as it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sucked, and if the skin is lifted, and no longer pricks the hair;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and it is the shape of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width;
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and fine silk;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm of length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the flesh another subtle thread of silk quickly, and tie the head of the two threads;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head in a warm place;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be warmed by the sun so that the work may be clarified, for this is a subtle and minor work, then take the needle and push it all the way into the root of the hair next to the skin, and make it pierce the skin sufficiently until you pull it out from above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair up to the flesh, and push into the flesh that same hair, if there is one or two or three or several;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then remove your hand so that the hairs come out entirely from the flesh into the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the flesh is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the flesh downwards with all the thread that you have ordained, until the flesh comes out from the hole and so that you see it by the sight of the eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you will thread the needle and the string, and close the eye and let it be for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and the flesh grows.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, accompany one hair with a longer one from the natural eyebrows, and let it be with the one you leave, until it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the decay of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease which is called "alexandrion" or decay of the eye comes into the eye, it does so in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one being natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the work is that you cut the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tendons of linen, and lift them until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not suitable that you use it in the treatment of things that are dried and constrained.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but it has an effect on softening things, such as figwort;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose of aqua or teasel and seeds of flax being cooked, and poultices of yew tree melted in any of the oils, and it envelops a tent, and cures this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it not become sour according to the form it had beforehand;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are not aids against this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it had beforehand.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocated, truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and the stitch in the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread comes out at both sides of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then is the flesh sewn over the threads, and the skin is cut with a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the wound returns to what it should be, it's good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a rasp and put it in the cut, and turn the skin, and make two cuts on either side of the skin;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the head of the two fractures of the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has no "I griesche
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then sew that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adjusted from what follows the wound, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment for what we have said regarding softening medicines, and of tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a fracture or from a wound or from a burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the skin, and according to what is seen before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two lips of a wound, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare everything so that they can make the body return to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to what they need in terms of work and instruments in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	due to a sudden pain in the knee
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this swelling comes to men in such a way that the knee is swollen with white stuff, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the knee, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch it to pinches, until you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patients cannot suffer that the too sharp spatula does not injure the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision be such that you lightly scrape away the assembled [tissue], so that the skin regrows according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it heals all the assembled [tissue], and sometimes forms in the oily bitter sauce, and the sweet oil rises from the bile;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the skin and the oil a layer of flax, and put on the oil wet wool in abundance of eggs;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days use sweet bile and hot things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the anointing with the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the anointing is in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	one is nervous and similar to a hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white, frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cuts the flesh with pincers, it cannot feel;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and the other symptom worsens towards the great eye, and increases little by little until it covers the entire sight and the entire light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head on a tray, then covers their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and raises the paper with one hand, then wraps the finger with small bandages, and stretches it to the opposite side;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then takes a needle, and puts in it the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and doubles the point of the needle a little and sticks it in the finger, and pierces it with the entire needle, and ties the finger with a thread and stretches it to the opposite side, and scrapes all the hair from the side of the finger which holds the thread and the needle next to the skin just to the head, then cuts the remaining part at the root of the eye with all subtle spatula and small forces, and lets the natural flesh or the eye, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears excessively;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nail sticks to the anvil solely, and to the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then one scrapes all the spatula from the softness of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And beware that the spatula does not touch the thin tissue and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision put in the oil a little of melted lead, and made from litharge, and let it stay until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure what is needed so that it becomes healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medications;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grow as I have described in the section, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the disease, and take the spatula gently a little sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And rub the unction gently underneath, and if you see that it lessens a little and the reason presses upon, then distill from your mouth into the oily colic made of litharge and red colic, and boil the oil until the other hour;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then resume the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is all bone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, then as with a hot abscess, treat it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is hindered in the oil by great hindrance, then stop at the elbow, and cut one part and not too much, so that no harm comes from it;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in the red oil-collier which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows on the tonsil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In the eyes of some men there grows a red flesh, and covers the tonsil and hangs over the palate and the uvula to the throat, and resembles a rose of baluster.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work of it is that the patient puts his head in a warm place, then opens the eyes, and takes out all that flesh with sharp instruments suitable for that purpose, and holds it with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, and beware that you do not touch the oil to the working place;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces which one calls ostesebel, according to the form shown after this chapter where it is demonstrated;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is cut, then apply the oil of distilled broom or you distill red collier and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the wound cotton with vinegar of eggs, so that it is assured to be free from apostema heat;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains, and the blood is cold and dominates, and you suspect hot apostema, then leave the oil and treat the apostema with things that appease the hot apostema;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as he is healthy, and thus do as many times the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless it is necessary that you alleviate the treatment of each weak oil from the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	Of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its function and weaken the eye all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary first that you examine the eye, in which it is, if it is strong, and there is no other disease besides the cataract;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then bind the eye in a similar manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then press those veins all along the shoulder according to his wisdom, and let the shoulders be subtle and double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two shoulders of equal size on the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then bind the forces of those veins subtly, and suck the blood from one hour to another, until you see the veins moving again outside of the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not block the eyes at the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not cut except those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the cataract.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are not able to collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some hours until the pains are eased and the abscess is assured by warm application, then begin again according to this method which is described beforehand until it is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and these are the forms of the fractures:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physician calls them "arista" fistulas:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat them with cautery and burning medicine according to what I have previously said, and it is not healed, then a hole is made in it where you cut into the abscess, there where it should be drained, and all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then you scrape away all the instrument of which it is formed;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "rough head", and it should be made from iron to the rough edge, and should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the bone of the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been scraped;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this sometimes, then restore the place with medicines that expel.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the places are swollen, and there is a tumor, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not suppurate and is not an abscess, and no bad accident comes, know that he is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if this is not so, then there is another trick to bring the fistula to the womb of the kidney according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered, then take the iron according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the staff be tapered up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then put it on the bone of the arm, and remove your hand from the shoulder a little, then turn the iron all around until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which comes out if he puts his hand on his kidney;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes calloused and hardened, thus one sees the matter at the kidney;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open from all sides, and there is no discharge to the kidney, nor thinning, then it is necessary that you read to the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then apply the plaster, then put warm poultices or hot irons to cause sweating, then apply to the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and apply a dressing on top of bandages and of cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain by means of a hard bandage above, and reestablish the veins to prevent them from being struck.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then let out the veins and keep the eye constrained by day and night, and if the limbs become swollen, it is necessary that you constrain them a lot;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then untie the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the eye getting better, it's good;
se ce non;	If it isn't so;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you reapply the plaster and the dressings and untie the bandage and the veins until he is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of the web of the membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When there is a disruption in the membrane, then it opens, and comes forth a flow of papers like a grain of resin, and it is terrible to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you cover the membrane, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the part below next to the skin above, then put another needle where it has the double thread of the part of the armier;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have it pierced, and let the first needle according to the condition;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the thread of double wire and tie a part of the vein around, and constrict it well, then remove the needle and put on the ointment moistened in abundance;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the threads cling to the vein, then treat the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and often the wound is constrained by the vein, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye has great appearance, then prick at the subtle spatula which comes from the depth of the oil, and rub the moist albuginea and descend the eye, and enter in as much as;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the pouch of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not other than a boil that assembles in the eye, resembling a descending fig, and it is not a fig.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it as much as you see the boil coming out to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be it fixed, and let it not descend and be the light disordered, and let the patient see things as he usually does;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is a fig, and if the descending of the boil is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make it on the corner of the eye a little by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corner of the eye and the cornea, as long as the boil is there;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is dislocated, if it is distilled into the oil of warm water, or of warm bath or decoction, and the bandage is applied, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the warmth of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the similarities of the warmth in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce through;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if one works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and anoint them with healthy oil and bind it very tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the cloth of the oil on your left hand if their eye is on the left, or on your right hand if their eye is on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if their eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if their eye is on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then put the point of the instrument within the crown by the thickness of a straw in the white part of the eye at the place of the lesser artery, then push the instrument that is called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand as much as it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measurement of the path of almagda be at the depth of the measurement of the space which is from the plum to the end of the blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the torn web, and then put the instrument as far as the vein is, then press another path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the vein descends now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a brief rest, and if the pain returns by the second path, put the staff with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not ascend, extract it gently in a circular motion with your hand little by little;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back into the pain a bit of gum seed, and raise from that the inner oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by means of a spoon the oil stupes or liniment moistened in rose oil and in abundance of use, and apply with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our condition, put on the common broth with an abundance of use.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the gum cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce the conjunctive gently, and do not go too deep, but make the subtle limb, then apply the ointment, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the comfortable bed, so that he sleeps on his back in the dark room;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let him avoid all movements, and take light foods, and not turn his head to the right or to the left, and let him be laid according to his condition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then untie him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put him on a diet until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the fever rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	Abscesses of the sides come, that you loosen the nail before the seventh day, and the dressing of what cures the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is appeased, if you loosen the vein and put on its place a gold leaf to cover any day, and be then in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then goes out of the house little by little, and converts into its conditions;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Iraq, who told us that in his country they made a medicine called almond milk, with which one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any of it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similarities of the forms of almagra, because those who do not know them see.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and are of urine properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And are the head of the bones of this same subtlety, and the skin in three angled corners.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the kidneys
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Certain times there grow in the kidneys various fatty growths, from which there are some that seem like scorpions at the base of the feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such or it has flesh with an entrenched black color, and if it has flesh of a swollen brown color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case then of these growths which is swollen, and not entrenched, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open its nostrils, and throw the oil on those growths, and rub them with warm.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then consider that you must sustain the subtle sharp point of a part, as long as you know that this instrument is entirely bony.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, then open it to all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and let it heal by itself, or apply a warm poultice, and drain the fluid as needed;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize the wound as much as possible until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then apply either vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound opens, and pus comes to the palate, know that it is infected;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if pus does not come out as needed, know that there is a dead flesh in the bone above, for which reason the instruments do not come to cut it;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then it is necessary that you put a thread of flax, not too thick, and let it be known by us, and have between each knot a space of one finger or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's head in the thread to his nostril so he can smell it, and pull it through as long as it comes out through the nostril inside the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times this is taught to the child in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the end which comes out through the nostril in one hand, and the other end which comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other while we are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you see that the knots have consumed that flesh, then pull out the threads, suck the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nostrils as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Make it burn for three days or more, as long as the ligaments consume all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on a plaster of pounded herbs for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of dry medications, use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and the medications;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And let it be of silver or copper, similar to a covered lamp, like a chain, and its conductors;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have a handle at the top to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease born in the head from the nose, which is called "telul", grows and increases greatly, until it becomes visible to the sight;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason it is necessary that you cut to the beginning, and remove all dead tissue, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and let it be covered until it becomes large, if taken in time if it is hard, of fixed color, of little sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if not the iron instrument touches it because it is an hidden abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, a great evil comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cover it all, then warn the patient and cut with fear, and treat the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and burned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Be aware that when a flow of discharge comes from one of these cartilaginous operations, it profits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary then when it happens to anyone, if one examines whether the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then one brings the two lips together for a stitch, then cures it until it is healthy;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of the wound until they heal, then bring the two lips together for a stitch, and constrain them, and powder with powder of blood of dragon, and burnt incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or other warming plaster, and let it be until it adheres by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	By thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	To men have between the lips an abscess hard, similar to grains of beans, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you pierce the lips, and cut into each knot, and take them with pincers and cut in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then put in the brain after the incision of the vitriol broth, until the blood is congealed;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the liver of arsenic, and treat the brain with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times a flesh grows on the gums unevenly, which the old people call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the bone or the blood flow;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the limb a vitriol broth, or other powders that are astringent and desiccative;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the flesh grows back after the incision, and often happens, if it covers a second time, and requires cauterization:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not grow back after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of excrescences to be covered.
des sordens	of the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Some times they gather at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth is stinking;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and take the teeth or the scabs in your hands, until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are moist;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes that which is in the first layer, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then proceed to the second layer and the third, until you have everything resolved;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the tooth has need of various forms of instruments for scraping, according to what the work requires, because the rasp that one uses to scrape the teeth have other forms than those that one uses between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay as long as you can, for one should not do it hastily;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance, thus one has no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained by the pain of the injury, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that is ailing.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and makes them pull out the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and however the pain does not depart from that, as long as the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen it be done by these surgeons;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the ailing tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with all the spatula strongly to guard the gum on all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then put your fingers or subtle pincers at the first knock and knock, until it is well loosened, then I affirm the pincers well;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient be in your teeth between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and move it as you have done previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is perforated and fragile, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you extract it subtly with the tongs, so that it does not break when extracting;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to be very careful in opening around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And it is good to beware that you do not break it, and leave a piece behind, and cause the patient greater pain from the root of the bad tooth than from the first one.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not make a mess like the ignorant surgeons do, who through their hastiness and hardness sometimes break the jaw, and do not consider what we have stated;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But sometimes they come from the injection of a serious disease through the roots that remain, or from the cartilage that it breaks, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is decayed, then wash the area with wine or vinegar and soap;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if a flow of blood comes from it, which often happens, then apply to the area a mixture of vitriol broth;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that is not effective, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the scrapers, where one grinds the teeth first, should be long and pointed and thick handles, so they do not bend when you grind the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be of thick metal so that they do not bend when grinding, and should be of well-made iron, and should have teeth to hold the handle.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you put on the spot a moist cotton cloth, one or two hours, until the gums are softened, then you push the teeth which are called "algefri", from which the gum seems to be pulled.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and let them be made sharp like a file and that is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these instruments, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a pelican, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and large so that it does not break my tooth, and if the root jumps out by itself, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if it does not, then you aid yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one is aided by this instrument which has two handles, because of its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in the front for the purpose of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, because of its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many dental instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments which are not mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are some diseases where the ancient ones did not teach the use of an instrument because of the diversity of the ills and it breaks or cracks the flesh or other bones, or it decays, if one seeks the instruments that one needs, which I have told you, and aids with gestures, because of its shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well-suited to hold the bone, that it does not shatter, but can be held and supported;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb with suitable medicines for that, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, thus the bone will regain its entire instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural body, and their form is ugly, and especially in women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is born after the other tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot soothe it or file it:
adonques lou raie;	then the root;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and is made of iron pointed at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut a little and a little with the forceps in the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a file suitable for its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is like the file with which one makes the nails;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and files the tooth a little and a little with light hands gently, so that it does not move until it dries;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then one smooths the surface at the end of any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth aches, either from percussion or from cold, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you treat them with medicines that tighten, and this is of no value;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if it is necessary to constrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver threads turn green and decay, but the gold does not move;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be moderately sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to thread the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the ends between the unhealthy teeth, if there is one or several, until you come sensibly just to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then reapply the covering just to the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and sensibly, so that it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the ends of the thread to one nail, and assemble them, and pass them between the healthy tooth, and put it so that it does not bite the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then let it be constricted as much as it can stay in place, and if it becomes undone, or the threads are broken, then constrain it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it stays in place and serves thus all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two jaws, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, freshly, just as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not interfere with it, for one who is not wise and suffers, and sometimes makes the form of a tooth from the bone of an animal, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and constricts it as we have said, and it stays and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper put the ligature on the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes there are ligatures that come from beneath the tongue or from the nature, which one is born with;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	from an accidental deep wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the large nerve thread, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if it has hardness or swelling, and it is a sudden wound, so cut the ligament and cut from the length that which holds it;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and beware that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is nearby;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done it, lift up the leg of the patient with rosiness and ease, or with coldness, then put near the tongue a piece of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and tie the patient's hands every night, so that they cannot get up.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the leg a warm broth of vitriol;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if he is without sense, then one should cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for that.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then heal with another healing until he is healthy,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see the flesh of a color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining into phlegm, and there is moisture, then one should purge the humidity, and make a subtle spit, and deliver from one side and the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if he is without sense due to your work, then put on him a mixture of vitriol until he is restrained, then return to your work as long as you treat everything thoroughly;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the limb from clay and from seat, and heal with other healings until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there come within the throat sores called "godath", and they are properly named the II amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of small size and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will remove it, or it would burst by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and round, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for cutting, but first take care that the abscess is warm and at rest.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hands be in your hand, and open his mouth and press the tongue under with all the instrument, because this is the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or of subtle iron, as are surgeon's knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and the thread in the hand, and thrust it through above more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and thrust some thing of the towels with it, then cut it with the instrument, because this is the form, that seems a violent force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all of these are curved, and one is different from the other, and are very sharp, and are made of iron or of steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cut with the nail, because this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let there be a cut on one side, and a name on the other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the veins, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and vinegar, and if there is discharge of blood, gargle the patient, or cooked corks of green apples, or fumes of myrtle, and similar things, until the blood is stanched;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then anoint the cure as long as it is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes there arise in the throat other abscesses besides the two veins, so cut them thus like the two veins equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had arisen inside her throat, to be sure, the abscess of the small sense;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had well taken and closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so raised that they had put two threads through the two openings of the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I probed then so much, and stuck in one of the corners, then pulled out the thread, and with it a large portion of pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I put another thread in the other opening of the nostril, and I opened the mouth and pressed the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after that I stuck the corner in these abscesses, and I tapped on one part, and nothing came out but a little blood;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and then the mucus of the woman's throat was loosened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut into that abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until they became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I burned and cauterized inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	unless it stays without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and may I be separated from these parts, and not be but what God made of them after me.
de l’uve	of the egg
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the humors descend to the egg, and it is inflamed and it is long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is disordered thick and round, it is called "egg".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is purified as we have said in the division, and the purification does not benefit me, and you see that the ulcers of the abscesses are soothed, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round and gathered and is not lengthy;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of a reddish color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned before;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the needle into the egg, and pull it out, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two glands.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut too much, it hurts the voice, and the speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use the ointment that we have mentioned in the incision of the two glands, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has a fear of being burned, it is necessary that you use art in the cauterization of their fearful sensation.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts their head in your lap, and then you press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and constricts it with a living sharp rod, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and then you fill the handle of this instrument, according to its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have at the head a little tube where one puts the medicine, such as the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the pipe;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient is sitting on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from their mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not go down the throat, and at the bladder;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand on the medicine and press on the egg, the quantity of a half an hour, until you see it become numb and the mortifications of the medicine be alleviated;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and envelop it with some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument all around the cotton on the chain above, until the cotton adheres to the egg;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry, and apply after 4 days or 5.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have need to restart the cautery of the medicine, restart it, and after the cautery, clean around the egg, with cotton embedded in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be aware of cold water, and be cured of gargling as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incising, nor is it cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and artemisia and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put in a seat, and make boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well plugged with strong earth, and inside the pot there should be an instrument made in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or of lead, and let one of the ends be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the vein, until the eye is mortified;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the recovery often happens, until the eye is dry, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, for many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and not to make the same heat as for the treatment of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and put inside the top a tuft of wool, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the tuft of wool does not let the greasy vapour reach the mouth, and it is a good remedy for health together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it happens to the throat or spine or fishbone, or some other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you pull what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing clearly;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not appear and is thrown back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance the thing happens through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of Turnsol, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the stomach, it will be felt, and then pull strongly;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take the instrument of a feather in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head elevated;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of it be taken, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because then it will be more or less according to what the thing is;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the swelling goes down, or it draws the instrument equally, as long as it is drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Certain times the blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the section, through the treatment of remedies;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when that does not benefit me, then examine the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, if it draws to all the small veins, or has subtle holdings that are worth that.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that is not worth it, take a heated iron, and insert it in the throat of the patient, then blow or draw from the iron the hot steam, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full view of the cold water, and open the mouth, and throw the throat back in swallowing, and move it with one's hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the blood vessels feel the cold, they congeal.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not coagulate as we have said, then suffocate the patient with arsentid, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the egg;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, because it will discharge without spitting.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are hot coals, and it be covered with a pierced cloth, and in this perforation be the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you give the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but goes to the blood vessels;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and let the blood flow now, and if it does not flow, then resume the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers from thirst, and has salty and foul things in the mouth, and does not drink a drop of water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it is necessary that it be forced out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument through which the blood is drawn, is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it has a resemblance to a hawk's beak, and has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and see this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory recalls here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in cutting;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners of which one is in its own likeness same, and from that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the limbs where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if an abscess one should not pierce, as long as the bowel is thin according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are thick, and do not thin according to their completion, like abscesses that are near the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets them be for a long time while they are purulent around, by chance the ligament and the nerve of the joint become corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is located on the main limb, and you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, then it will not harm the main limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or when it is in the foundation, puncture it only when it is ripe;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is necessary that you puncture the abscess after complete digestion, except for the one that is in the foundation, so that it does not decay within, and be putrefied, and become elongated, and produce a fistula;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time for puncturing the abscess which is ripe according to the completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the separation of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the decreasing of the swelling and of the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens the muscles;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be of the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and in the veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no place for a poultice.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that swell, according to whichever member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is of value to leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce through the skin before that, the body will be poisoned by its venom, and will be full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they touch the lips and the depths of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you put small bandages on small abscesses, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and on large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the hair, and cauterize;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become so tender as a grape, and is numb, then it is necessary to do as one does with buboes:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such ones that are cut into three angles, and if there are such ones where one cuts as with the razor of a dead body, like abscesses of the entrails;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce the skin plainly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscesses are large, and they collect a lot of pus, that you pierce them, so as not to drain all the pus at once, but rather drain a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then press on the abscess up to the next day, then drain whatever comes out afterwards;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times, a little at a time, until all the pus has come out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the vein often bursts with the issue of the pus, which by chance kills the patient, and you are not aware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	End this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a flat cut, then put on dressings of linen or cotton wool;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put on each one a dressing so that they touch one against the other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or with a poultice of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it tightly for three days;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then anoint it, and treat it with oil until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if evacuation of blood occurs in your work, then apply cold and watery water, and wet the cloth, and put it on the affected area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the hemorrhage of blood persists, then apply governance and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is during the season of winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary to put on tents and moistened dressings with wine and hot oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then it is necessary to put on moistened dressings with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then dissolve the abscess and the pus, and treat it, as is necessary, until it is healthy;
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see it in this chapter.
des soros	Of the sores (or ulcers)
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or there are boils that come from the head, and they are manners of us that are in the thighs, just like the jousting of a kidney, and many have similarities to it.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	It has fat and such things where there is moisture, just like in poules;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if it has such things that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no point of doubt, then the artery does not make a contrary condition.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is such that you examine all the instrument that is called "intestine", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then it flows through the thigh from the loin.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, then it dries without leaving anything the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in vinegar and in oil, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those that run who have remained behind at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains of it;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds a nut of fat, cut it according to this form, from the length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cut your lancets, and scrape on all sides, and put all your treatment of drawing to the side where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery makes a constriction, do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do for an abscess if it is pierced, and to cut and to cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	Cut into the pierced and moist abscess, if it is lighter, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess as hard as a rough, harsh and white stone, and could not break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had struck there, one would have made as good a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming on the head, except for those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be every hour at most dependent on the flow, so that the matter can issue.
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment if as it suits
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there occur abscesses on the neck, and dislocations of the joints, and in the corners, and sometimes they come to another part of the body, and are many, and are intertwined one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its own membrane, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant which do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each part and is not numb at the arms of the neck nor at the artery nor in the conduit, and is not perforated;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	If it happens that you cut with a razor, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the wound are tender as a sore, then you are in this profession, as we have said regarding abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and touch it a little and a little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and it is not the tendon nor the cutting edge, which the hands hold, and do not go too far forward, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and that does not stop the bleeding, then put on the wound burnt vitriol or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to putrefy.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stanched, it returns to its work, until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then look at your hand index if there remain small scrapes, if you collect and mend them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is in the root of the vein a large wound, it is not necessary that you cut that scrape at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang loose without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then fill the old wound with cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scrape, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no remaining surplus because of the size of the scrape.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you undertake to cut at its root, and pull firmly, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrophula that have an excess of flesh, prick where it appears to be open;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and prick it as the one mentioned before, in dependence, then I will treat with unction and similar things, so that it corrupts that which remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment with unction will begin to stick, until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	of shivering
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw in our land anyone who did it, and it is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have shivering, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat, which is called "epiglottis", be examined;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one should not trust in that, because all the veins and the part of the sickness are so that those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the jaw.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to remove the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision of three or four circles, or a little cutting through, between the two rings or by the quantity of the cut of the surface, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those veins are adjacent to the section of the epiglottis so that there is no point of cartilage, and the vessels are long with it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full length, then cuts the kernel as far as it comes to the trachea.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and let the blood vessels, if you see any thing, and then cut the surface, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the flesh of the knee, which jumps due to the leg that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound be covered with a dressing.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it gently without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Do not give this treatment unless the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect is in the artery.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut through the epiglottis for that which the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason the old ones command to let the wound be covered until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or in three, and then they command to cauterize the wound and treat, until it is cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the tendons of her arm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the doctor, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and it was clear that she had not cut a vein or a duct except for the throat, and the veins had flowed out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated her until she was healthy;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and had nothing but that the young woman was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I said that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no pain.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of a jasmine, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural does not cause a stranglehold.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is in two manners, of which one is similar to a fat that grows near us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it causes fear, and it is not necessary to do anything except to make fumigations in that which is small, and to prove and examine the entire intestine:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as big as the nut of a walnut, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts the nuts, and take it out completely, if there is any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and treat it as it is necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many kinds of us are, of which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and then it is necessary that I speak of all the difference that is between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that hemorrhoids are hot and feverish tensions, until the bubbling has passed, and is accompanied by decay.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then relieve the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With our sort there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a husk, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and increases like a tumor, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two similarities, either grey, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of an injury, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take the most moist place that you find on the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, as much as you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the entromissoire, and take heed in what sort it comes out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture runs short, which color it has, thus make an incision as I have said regarding other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fatty, thus make an incision in a cross, and take it with pincers, and scratch it lightly from each part and observe the coat where it lies that you pull it out whole with the injury;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it comes back to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains, and the blood does not gush out, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and put on soothing things for hot abscesses, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those things that promote scarring.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the veins are beating against it or otherwise, then hasten and apply to the limb a mixture of vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of the blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the copper those things that had been left from the outset.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Look here at the forms of the introverted entrails, and they are of three manners:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three parts which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and they are of three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles which one uses to cut the sores, and they are of copper citrin, or iron, or silver, and some are yellow, and are more expensive than black plum for encircling the fistula's clogs;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the tumors are of many similarities, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Wounds, bruises, and small [injuries].
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are wounds that have two or three humors of the same kind;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are wounds that have three humors, and are of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are wounds that have two humors, and wounds of only one humor, and are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary for their body.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these [instruments] that one makes are cutting, and of such there are some that do not cut more than on one side, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these [instruments] there are some that are applied to the limbs, so that the patient does not feel themselves at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Great, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use more force than on the joints of the legs, such as knees, and arms, and shoulders, and limbs, and similar ones;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the shape of a fistula, according to this form, to staunch blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes at the place that bleeds abundantly from the veins, and arteries, and sometimes breaks according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes they swell the shoulders of certain men when they become corrupted, until they seem to be female shoulders;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain swollen and inflated, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to treat according to the form of this line up to the seventh hour:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with healing medicine of charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and the treatment until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs low, and is dislocated by its size as it happens to women, then make two sutures above, through similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line  to the line;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the lack of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it reaches the mucus and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are kinds of hard scrapings where there is crust, and in which there is moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore that contain moisture need to be cut according to this form, from line B to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with dressing sufficiently until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrapings, then do it as we have said in cases of scrapings, and if the wound is open, then apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and also it happens to the swollen and abscessed vein;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows in this case what is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, feel for the strangeness;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is due to the vein, then it is because of defective blood flow;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to try to treat this abscess, and similarly when it is under the shoulders and arms and neck and in many other places, and it is very serious.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and the one who is in charge must avoid it also, and for the one who has a swollen artery, they make an incision through the skin from far away;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the waist to the ankles, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then push through the flesh a needle, and make it pierce just to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread on both sides, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then touch the limb which is between the two strings of an instrument as far as the blood can flow from it, and let the abscess be opened;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then bring together the wound that the bowels are pushing out, until the string is tied;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal what joins to what, until it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscesses are along the length of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then push the needle through the flesh that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	After the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts at the two sides of the flesh;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then you rethread another needle through all the threads beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess as long as the superfluity goes, then cut the superfluity from the flesh and let remain what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a dressing moistened with wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and bandages until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, just as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the kidneys when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the joints and in the fingers and in all the limbs where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many conditions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is extracted forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in depth of the body, but rather near the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it moves well in all directions, and does not go neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not need to be cut with iron;
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance it becomes a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or at the forehead, make the skin spatulate.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, then hold it with a bandage, and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then suck on the wound, and scratch it, then remove the bone and reassemble the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	Hanging large tumors
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in the belly and not in any other part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has a subtle root, and the head is large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and it has small feet and very large mouths;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two of them in his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had thin roots, and they were already cut, and they corrupted the moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them out and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six, and the work of cutting is that you should examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the cupping is on the broad spatula, then it should be in your presence with the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in the cutting there often comes too much blood, and if it is not stopped, then you must have the cautery nearby;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the thread of flax until it holds the joint, and cut it without effort;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, fear to cut them in the middle for the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then apply the cautery so it does not grow back;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of fixed color and little sensation and of slow movement.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enclosed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the navel is blocked
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the navel comes from cauterization of a wound or a cut on the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the navels, as it happens in other instances, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is present, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the cut of the skin and the discharge from the navel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various discharge.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the discharge of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses on their sides if they are swollen, and then it returns, and by chance if it is strained, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and from strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears well when you press it with your hand, not constraining anything.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to blood, it appears by these signs: the abscesses being large and hard, and stuck according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you examine its appearance for blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is fitting that you abandon the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to pull in his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign with ink all around the navel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then instruct him to sit down between your hands, then go inside the bed that you have designated for all the spatula, then place the majority of the abscess upwards towards all the great uncle.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie him with a strong thread, or with a cord of strong twisted rope firmly, and let us have the soothing bandage.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open the majority of the abscess stretched on the bandage, and you will find your right index finger, and cut the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you have tied it with the bandage, untie it, and cut the intestine at the bottom of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you have found the bowel, take it with the groin, and cut away the excess flesh;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein has made you hesitant, then go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and you will thread two strong threads, and put the two needles inside that which you have made in a cross that you make puncture;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in four locations under the ankles, and if you see it, remove the ankles, and let the body alone until it purifies, and cut the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or remove it when it becomes subtle and purified, then treat what needs treatment, and cut the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and strain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the body for what it needs, and sew the body.
dou chancre	of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the section about the symptoms of cancer, and how one should open with medicines, and how one should choose the treatment of iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say that cancer grows in the marrow, and requires great caution in treatment, and the ancients said that when there are cancers in the body or where one can remove them like a cancer that is in the breast, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and one should entirely remove it when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never seen any harm from it;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever been harmed in my presence.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in the body or where one can hide it, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him spit if he has shown a fullness, then prepare the patient with good body to perform the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut your lancets or hooks, and shave all around, and remove the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the body with your hand or with something, and if the flowing of blood makes you feel contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stanched;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the treatment of another treatment last until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the symptoms of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment which is made by medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is a simple obstruction;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch with iron in these two symptoms:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanites and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you apply medicine to this symptom of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicine, and the treatment does not benefit, if consider that the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and diarrhea and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If he does not touch iron, for there is doubt in it;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient with a strong and virtuous constitution, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should operate:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the patient straight up in your hands, and let the attendants press the belly with the needle at the lowest part of the breast, then take the spinal instrument according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cutting on both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to the point, and let it not be so internal that it can come near to the intestine when one puts in the fig, and does not obstruct it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then examine if the dropsy is turning towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you open into the belly three fingers deep above the navel;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is caused by the illness of the liver, it should be a flesion on the left side of the abdomen for III fingers;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it's due to the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient urinate on the flesion so the superfluities do not flow to that weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the skin with the instrument, and the knot, and raise the hand on all the spatula between the skin and the surface, just as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or toenail;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the surface until the spatula comes to the empty place, and it is the place of the needle, then pull it strongly, and I thrust this instrument from which this form is;
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thread of subtle silver, and is made of thin copper or brass, and has on the end a small perforation;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it costs from one side, three piercings;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two of another side, and one of another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a quill, and it is the form of the incision that the writers carve the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of them is the knob, so that when the tendons come to the knob, they now slide on the tendon;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient dies from the resolution of his arm's spirit, or he falls into a coma, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to that which the dispositions of the virtue of the sick man signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then bring the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the heart which stops up the perforation which is on the surface, from what I have spoken, that you should proceed according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then reinsert the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and bring with the needle a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do it on that day, and guard yourself from putting too much except for a little needle.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much of the needle, so the treatment of the tomb or swollen abscess is hot, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and dye with vitriol;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment with drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the needle, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have a hole in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it happens that he has to pierce all the very subtle tissue according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or make a subtle hole in the pipe of the bladder, and tie it and hold it thus for three or four hours, and when he wants to urinate, let the hole be opened, and let him urinate, and then close it again;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance there is no harm, for the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	For one whose hole is small, there is a medicine for the pipe of the bladder, as we have said, which will enlarge it.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the hole in its place are crippled, for none are born with the hole at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod up high;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot heal because the matter cannot come close to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the treatment is that the patients lie on their back, put the head of the rod and the handle as the width of a quill, so that the perforation happens in the middle, as it is necessary;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the effusion of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of what flows blood, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times cysts come to the rod, and it is an appearance of flesh wound;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and in them there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if necessary, you should take them with a subtle onion, and cut and cleanse all, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the joint until it becomes healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you should apply a cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and the ulcer is on the edge, and has one part inside the skin and one part outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is sewn, then cure the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it together, it is not assured that the edge of the wound will not be pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in its edge and in the body.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then you should remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranate trees and lichen, then cure it with other cures until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if an issue of blood comes, then prepare the lunar cautery according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries help with two dispositional conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	it is to know, for the issue of blood, and for the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or conduct on the rod a chain of lead, and let the patient urinate through;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is adherent to the head of the rod in those who have not been circumcised, or it is because of a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scratch with a sharpened instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a grievous thing to divide the flesh, then it is necessary that you scratch with a spatula or some pointed tool at the head of the rod and of the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then sever gently between II, and put a subtle layer of warm linen on the cold limb, so that it does not stiffen.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a matter of continued dressings like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	In every way that we do this work of our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we do the least harmful work, and the lightest for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions on men in their old age, and with force, and all to no avail;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the heart is affected because it has two tissues, and by chance if one takes a blow and the other remains unaffected.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	When the hip joint is injured, and the pain is double, and in the treatment which is painful it is not assured that the point of the member will be restored;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the treatment of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrupts the work, and many times it happens that they have no need for treatment and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the treatment which is made to the thread of string I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well both sides and excesses.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in the whole stretch;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread should be well stretched around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him tie the thread around the stick so tightly, and then you make it come out in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make it straight between your hands, and support the strengths between your hands or under your feet so that the veins are not seen, nor any of the tendons.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand to the rod and blow on the wound, and pull it up high as long as the head of the rod is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well of the filth that has accumulated, then tie the limb securely with a double thread, then tie it under the hip to the other limb;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and tie it to the two fingers by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and cut between the two threads, then lift the heart upwards gently and pull the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply powder on it and on the powder a plaster made from a mixture of cooked tempered vinegar of rose, jammed with rose oil, good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as it is sick.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at the mundification is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two sides should be held and should be cutting, and the sides should be as large as the same width:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the failure of the mundification is when the inner core is not suitable for the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the limbs make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with clamps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it lasts three days, and that which is beneath the rod is swollen, then let it be until the abscessed place is appeased, and the scab is lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you cut it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Heal then the wound of things burned by powder, which we have said or treated in the chapter on powders, and if one cuts too deeply and it goes to excess, and it rises, so it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal the wound, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of bowel, or of dead flesh, or of similar things, which we have spoken of in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the neck or collar of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let his feet be placed on his back, and his belly be stretched from the upper part to the back, and let the patient restrain his thigh as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure on the stone above, because of which the urine is stopped;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer the extraction using all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be made of subtle silver, lightweight and hollow, like a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let its tube be a palm and a half in length, and let it be subtle at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of urination is that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a small ball of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess of the wool and push it just to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist oil of olive and oil of olives and heated water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then lightly put the syringe on the rod, until it comes to the root of the rod, then fold the rod back towards the bulb;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming just to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because what leads there where it goes is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then pull the thread throughout the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it outside, and make the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and reintroduce the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When concretions or blood come into the bladder, or pus is gathered, and you want to administer sharp medicines, then make all the instrument that is called "clyster", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the limbs are held by what the medical treatment is such that it supports well the rod without addition, if one can then draw in the moisture, and push where the need is;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see to give your medications in the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out the drawing that is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you draw out the moisture with the syringe, and then strongly push back the drawer inside;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle pipe through which one administers a clyster to the bladder:
si est ci:	It is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or of steel, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and disjointed from the breast or where the ligaments hold;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you want to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a bond with a double thread, and heat this moisture on the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then thrust the head of the cleanser into the rod, then stretch your hand on the bladder to bring all the moisture together, until the patient feels that the moisture has gone into the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it all around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the division the ways of stones, and the extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and have said the difference between the stone in the kidney and in the bladder, and all the symptoms, and in which stone one should operate with a cut;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the rod;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water of the bladder escapes similarly to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it openly harasses, and rubs the patient's rod, and constrains them many times, and then congeals;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and from many of these jumps the foundations
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is light until they are 4 years old, and is very grievous in the elderly, and is similar to the middle-aged, for those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the treatment is easier for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a cluster, to purge all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and bend and move to the back, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes jumps out from the high place;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be behind his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then touch the wound and inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the bladder, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall from touching everything, anoint your right index finger with oil of the left hand, if the patient is old, or your right middle finger, if the patient is young and complete;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and put it in its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it is near the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on with your finger, and put it to the back of the place where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him that he stretches with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand holds the skin which is beneath the intestines in the area where the cut is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then he wraps the spitum with a copant, from which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make between that which is between the intestines and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and let it be straight on the stone, and its two sides be equal or fundamental, and let the width be traversed so that it is wide by defect, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the press if its two sides which are in the fundament, so that it jumps without sensible labor;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is a part of stone where it has edges and margins:
si est griés a issir;	thus it is ready to be extracted;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if the part that is underneath, resembles a pebble, and is rounded, whose exit is slight.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	At the sky hence where it has edges and margin, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not heal, then you must strain on the tendons that are as a file to the head, for moving the stone so that it does not crack;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you apply an instrument subtly curved at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engineer it in, then enlarge the little hole a little, and if the blood does not flow out, then strain with a glass tube;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut into it, then pull out strongly, and the small ones afterwards if there are several;
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be extracted, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	Where it dies, or the urine comes repeatedly by the bed that the bladder cannot hold.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but you must force yourself to drag or to pull out the tendons, until you pull it apart by pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound of tar and of rose water and of dragon's blood, and strain it, and put on a moistened cloth in oil and in wine, or in oil and in warm rose water and cold, to appease the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then support the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, anoint the limb well with oil and water, then treat it with application of diyachilon and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess or a wound comes with corrosion, and there is a coagulation of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained by this means, which is done in such a way that without health with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then put your finger into the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound from the pus and the blood and the serum, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the uses that you treat, that you tie the thighs together, and apply the medicine to the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed in, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the treatment of what I describe thus, that you often cut with a knife, is excused from cutting for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron rod in this shape and let it be with three angled points in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take the thread and tie it around the end of the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the iron rod gently into the orifice until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the iron rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if urine comes out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the orifice.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is thus broken, and the blood comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this because of something that prevents it, then tie the thread beneath the stone and the other above, then put the orifice in place against the stone between the two threads, then pull out the thread, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal them as long as they are sick.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and is forbidden for three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed and knows how to cure herself with remedies, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art with her hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of the man, for which it requires a deeper and more dangerous cut, and there is great fear in it. And if there is need for it, then it is necessary that you take a well-versed midwife, and with pincers seize the thing, and if you do not seize it, then ask for a chaste and subtle midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you instruct regarding the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and consider very well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to put her hand or foundation and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, if the pain moves away from her hand, and instructs her to put her hand or with the patient, and feels and presses her left hand on the stomach firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it from the groin to the bottom of the stomach up to down, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the spine, where it appears to be moved, and feel the stone in that area;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move his finger from the stone or above, and let his thumb be cut to the first joint;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then cut in the wound, if you feel the stone with your finger, increase the size of the wound until the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is known, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood does not stop, then apply a dressing of vitriol to the wound, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stanched;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is out, and use the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood is coming out, and it’s from an artery that has been cut, then put powder on the wound and bind with bandages and strips, and do not press again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has been calmed, and the limbs have been purified, then return to your work, until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rumor aqueous is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or whitish fluid, which is dislocated from the area of the intestines, that contains the humor;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the liver, so that one thinks that it is another liver;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the knee between the white and the thigh that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen rarely.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is from weakness that comes to the knees, and the matter is spread there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the knees, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is a yellowish color, or without red, or black, or pale white, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is on the white and thigh that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are round, a little long like the figure of an egg, and do not touch the knees, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own area, then the abscesses are round with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the legs and the white surface, then it feels good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine thoroughly all the interior quarters, from which the shape is formed before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to that which comes after the interior, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then put a bandage on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and instruct the servant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart of the legs;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the left spatula, and cut the skin of the legs in length until near the knee, and let the incision be quite straight, dividing the skin of the legs up to the white surface, and scrape subtly according to his power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the outer layer of the skin with a needle, and extract all the pus, and then apply your poultices, and the outer layer is mended;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the core of the abscesses, but only the surface;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut all or in pieces the covering of it subtly, that if you do not cut it well wisely, the pus will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the skin is sound and strong on your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the outer layer;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two lips of the core of the abscesses to a suture, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the skin corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the veins that are suspended, doubting the deterioration of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut around the head to all the suspensor, and extract the vein, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a moist linen cloth in oil of rose;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another moist linen cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two heads, and put above doubled dressings, and tie it with all the string that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two dressings, and fill them with linen dressing according to this likeness and let them be assembled by sewing on the throat of the arm, and one of the sides takes hold on the bottom up to the back, and the other to the part of the elbow;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other due to the head on the two shoulders, and let the entire assembly of the restraint be in the curve of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this treatment of cauterization is applied to the iron in the size of the thigh, and it is that you take a fine cautery tool, and cut the skin of the intestines, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white stuff that contains the pus is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that stuff as with needles, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery tool:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut it in all the ways that you can, until you scratch everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and beware that the hot thing does not touch the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more salvatory;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of the shedding of blood, and doctors of the treatment of the thigh;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if none of these things oppose you, or an abscess or a flow of blood or another thing, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then perform a perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the humors are in balance, then make the patient sit on the seat, elevated.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess on the lower part of the spatula, and make the perforation as long as the body allows.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the wound be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white tissue does not let the pus exit from the mouth of the wound, then you must put a probe or the instrument with which one treats the pus of dropsy, whose shape is thus before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge a little the wound, and know that the pus returns, and is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the entrails
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many conditions, because it seems to me that moving it is worth leaving it alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the symptoms of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the entrails;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be known by excess of bitter and sharp humor, which is spread to the bowels, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are some grievous and fearful abscesses, and of a foul color, and sometimes come from an artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not matter that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this likeness, and on the other painful places;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut around the area of the abscesses, then are the veins elevated, and pull the skin of the white surface, and deliver the swelling from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you pull the vein, and cut around it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is near the surface, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver the entire tendon, and cut around it equally.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the wound is in the rear vein, then it is necessary that you cut it entirely, and extract the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the work is completed, apply the wound with a dressing of warm oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the entrails
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a swelling, with the softening of the entrails, and the patient feels grievous pain when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this illness is as well prescribed anxiously as the one previously mentioned, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a seat or a bench, then apply to him the suspension of the entrails below your fingers, to all the vessels which are near to the anus, and bind the thighs, and stretch them forcibly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with the spatula knife widely through to reveal the vessels, as long as they are discovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then he fixes a needle where there is a double thread, and ties it to the first joint where the vein has come, and ties it again at the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then he cuts them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted tissues;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then he cures the wound like the others or where a bone is exposed, so that no vessel is seen that nourishes one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for from this comes no harm, and if all the vessels are near, then it is necessary to cut through the intestines to all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the bones do not lose their nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dry and cannot be helped;
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The coming of this flux is by the section that comes from the spleen, or the tension on the belly in the area of the shoulders, because the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the intestines;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this dislocation is from the double joint, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	from a blow, or a jump, or a fall, or from lifting of a heavy burden, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the symptoms when it is from the extension of the joint, are that they come on gradually and slowly, over a long period, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal up to the depth, because the joint presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it is from the dislocation of the joint, that it brings on sudden severe pain, and there are various abscesses appearing beneath the skin, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body at the fault of the joint.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines slip with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron with fear, because it makes them want to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put their intestines back in with their hand inside the wound, if it can be re-entered;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let them be supported on their neck, between your hands, and lift the hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the intestines from along the length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the liver of the waist, pieces according to that which you have need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bones can protrude;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the surface that is beneath the skin of the intestines, until the white surface appears uncovered on all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your index finger in that which guides the intestine, in that which is between the white surface that is beneath the skin of the navel, and between the second surface, and separate that which is behind the navel, and between the second surface;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the intestines, and let the white skin be above on your left hand, and lift the vein to all the skin towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister that he stretches the vein upwards, and unties what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your fingers if there is a point on the intestine enveloped or white skin hard, and if you find anything, then push it to the bottom of the belly;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle where there is a thick thread made of many threads, and push it into the back part of the skin, which is after the skin of the intestines;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the hands that appear with threads, as long as there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the skin, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong ligament of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the veins, and bind them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, lest the abscess that is there not grow.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the third vein according to the first long two fingers from that one, and after these two veins leave enough space which is hidden near the heart of the intestines the size of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and afterwards all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part which is next to the skin of the intestines, as far as the blood and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then anoint the moistened wool with oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will anoint the vein that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the said bladder is cauterized after the incision, due to doubt of excessive blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and leaves the string alone until it cuts through by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is late in healing, then apply a warm poultice, and put on that which we have said, until it cuts;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this disease I have never seen anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient ones said that it is made like the disease which is next to the liver, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision above and below lightly with a thread;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of that which is swollen, until the vessels dry;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes the joint comes out of its socket, as we have said, and separates the limb;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and it doesn't touch any of the intestines to the cotyledons, and if it touches them, it's a little, and repairs all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and nevertheless if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestine touches;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the fistula that is at the joint, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and the limb becomes flabby and separates;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and its treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously said;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient puts his hand over his back between their hands, then cuts the limb of the dislocated joint with a large scalpel according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the abscess that is beneath the skin where it swells, then take the razor and put it on the apparent place of the abscess;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press on the deep part of the belly, then cut the two apparent places of the abscess on the edge of the razor, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the edge of the razor, and do not touch any part of the abscess nor extend the opening to anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of the ulceration of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then cure it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it becomes inflamed and cure the wound, until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is constricted, and has no appearance on the outside, and the cauterizations are applied to this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times is softened the skin of the intestines in some men, because the inner layers that are inside are made soft, and it is disgusting to see;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is a job, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on their back, and to cut the skin that has become soft on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two lips together with a suture, and you see, first cut away the excess of the softened skin to three or four firm sutures;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the sutures, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of the castigation
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Purging is abhorred in our law, and for this reason it pleases me that I do not speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary to force it for two manners:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the physician hastens to respond when one asks him, and in haste the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have need of the flesh of certain beasts to help us, such as of goat and of sheep and of cat and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that cauterization is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by traction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the member is softened and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then we take it with our hand, as long as it is loose and you do not feel them anymore.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the cauterization of the thigh:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then lift the penis, and cut above each testicle, when you have them well exposed;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin which is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of punishment is worse than that which is made by traction, because in traction there remains by chance some thing of the entrails, by which the beast desires filth;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then heal the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two entrails open as well as the figure of the nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the fist as a rod and two entrails.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the adjacent flesh all, and heal it as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the intestines, there is no point of cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenderness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tenderness is an ulcer located on the natural part, as it is too shameful to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have had it so large as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you take the superfluity of the tenderness with your hand or with tongs, and grasp it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not pull too much from the bottom, lest a flow of blood does not come, for one cure drives out another cure until it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and for another ulcer that grows at the mouth of the marrows, and fills it, and by chance breaks out, and is similar in appearance to a cow's, and for this they call it the ancient "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to amputate, as we have said the incision, and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of rheumatic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Rheumatic is that which when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the passage is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is from sharp adjustment, or of subtle and thin sieve, and is made deep in the marrow, or in the ribs, or in the back, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have to wither;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this thing is through the examination of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears near the thigh, or to your back or to the hip.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle and thin humor, and it approaches the lungs, then hurry, and anoint the joints:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then feel the two lungs strongly, until the subtle humor is gone, and let the stoppages be covered;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take the vein, and the mole in oil, and put it on the body, and give the woman a house remedy each hour, so that she cannot suffocate.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the humor is hard and thick, then it is necessary to cut the similar spongy tissue resembling a molar tooth.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stoppages are of flesh origin, then let it be supported on the shoulder and cut;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and apply the blood-stanching medications, such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with a little oil;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then anoint a plaster of wide lung, so that the wound cannot suppurate;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it be for a long time, and anoint it with a plaster of dry flax;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let it be cured with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes a sharp humor, if you treat it according to this method, unless it is an abscess that has become enclosed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the enclosed abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without warning flow, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are deeply in the marrow, and do not appear to feeling, if it is not the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, afterwards apply the poultice as a bandage, and cut at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then soak her feet in a warm bath for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if a flow of blood comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumach and bark of pomegranate trees and gall and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to put on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is strained, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, then have made warm applications on the back and to the same sides to strike;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take a woolen cloth, and the extract in juice of plantain or in juice of aglentier with old wine, and apply warm to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has burst, then treat the limb with ointment as long as it is sore;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the rough head, if it is necessary to scrape as I have said the tumour;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as cancer and abscesses that burst and herpes and eczemas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary then to describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that affect the bowel.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look at the abscesses when they begin to arrive, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make it measure until the pain is appeased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have two small seats where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together with the parts separated from the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a binding bond;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then suck the abscess towards the right side, and introduce the instrument through which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the discharge;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you go to administer this instrument, that you first determine the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and that it does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instruments do not injure them;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument to the bottom, and that he holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses are open, and one makes a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a spatula or a sponge.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the wound is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moist bandages in rose oil, or in dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tent or suture of the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put through the marrow and on the finger a clean linen bandage in water or vinegar so that it is cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat afterwards for 2 hours of applying heat, having it on until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes raise the marrow and the wound with a syringe of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristolochia being cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the heat treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound grows in the marrow, it is necessary that you protect yourself from iron cauterization, but rather treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	of swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is proper first to know the shape of the natural swelling of the womb, and these signs are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the sinews of force hasten to issue forth;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	But it is known that these infantements are according to the natural figure, and they issue from their head, and the second with them;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the sinews issue all at once;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends to its head, the secondine goes with it, and the marrow is cleaned of its superfluities by good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes to its feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes to his belly, or to the liver, and is converted by accident over his neck, and by other evil figures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes out naturally onto its head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the womb is weak, then make her sit on a seat, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and let its natural oil or heated poultice be applied, and then put the bath between her two thighs the small suppository of which this is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the secondine, and apply to one nail as much as the moisture that is in its shank bone;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's stomach until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a massage of heated poultice with oil of cypress;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her press and strain with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	now the infant will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands become dislocated, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not fall due to the removal;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cut the hands at the joint which is situated in front, and extract the infant, and reset similarly;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the extraction of the infant from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes to its feet, then it is necessary to push from above;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the hips, if it is ordered to grip, and the hand is made to press on the condyle;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it rises too much, then God wants it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't go too far as we have said, if it turns little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it doesn't come as we have said, take a mixture of oil and wax, and melted gum, and pound all in the mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman inside and outside, then make her sit in hot water until the bottom of the hips;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened from below, make her a poultice of myrrh, and put it below, and let it stay for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on a seat, then make her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and press her stomach gently, for the infant jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, thus I put its ball in its hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let it be laid on its neck, and its feet hang down, and let it sleep on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold its hands little by little, and then press its hands on the stomach, and remove the cushions from beneath, until it is prepared down below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not jump, then take its feet and move them gently, then move the stomach upwards, then I move its hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and rock the infant little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to grasp herself as much as the infant is coming out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the exit of the child who comes with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to put back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be put back, then make the woman get up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her sit on a bed, and take off her tight leggings;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then anoint the muscle that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she is not delivering, then have her sit on a chair, then try to put back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and turn the child according to its natural position, and have her exert herself, and instruct her to grasp herself as much as the infant is coming out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the exit of the child on its neck, and having expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back;
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the patient holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts the arm lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the natural muscle of the shoulder and the elbow, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make him sit on a seat, and instruct him to take himself in hand;
et la fai esternuer.	and make him stretch.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for the whole second finger
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for the whole second finger, cut the second finger to one nail, until the mucus is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it swells on his face and on his neck, cut it from the throat, so it is not retained, and the swelling decreases;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then take the child inside, as long as you have put it as it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take herself in hand at any time:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then one must treat it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the discharge of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It is known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they have a rare name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that it is because they are multiplied, and are divided by the blood vessel which separates them, which is tied to the navel;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out naturally like one body, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out completely, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath, and do and handle lightly what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it as it is worth for health.
de plusors enfans	Of many infants
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and all are fully formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the wise woman knows all this, for by chance similar things happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	thus do according to what is necessary
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform a manual operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be bent downward, and her thighs be raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and let the midwife take charge of the two parts, where she should be tied to the bed so that she is not treated with the downward movement of the infant;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the newborn with a mixture of oil made from nuts and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint its hands with these oils and mixtures;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently press on the newborn's legs, then turn its body to where it bends its knees that are suitable for this, and take care that the infant is prepared so that it descends upon its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if it fixes its knees in its eyes or in its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or in the jaw or near the ribs, and if the downward movements are upon its feet, then it fixes or pricks them with tender ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he takes the ankle in his right hand, and puts the curvature between the two fingers of the left hand, and bends all his hand lightly, and fixes the ankle in one of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the ankle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix one against the other ankle, or you who are in this profession, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch them evenly by moving from one side to the other, for the muscles to exit, and let the ankles be held by the muscles, as this is their shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the joint with some of his fingers of oil, and bend it in that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains a point of it, then put this ankle or higher place, and do that until all the fluid comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to the strain, then you must wrap it with a bandage, until it becomes whole;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then put the cup on the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you must do on the other hand, and on the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the infant is large and it is stuck in the birth, or it has the head tangled with the shoulders, then you must push the spinal vertebrae between your two hands, and make the head and extract the shoulders;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you round it to the instrument that is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus same make the veins have a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then draw the bones to the tendons, and if the head is thrown out and it is strained by the strength, then let it be split, until the moisture that is in the foot issues out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot exit, then cut it by pieces from the mouth that you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is stuck in the belly or between the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce through so that the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the needle is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the dressing at the mouth of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a draped bandage on the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make an incision in the belly or the chest, so that the moisture that is there can flow;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is swollen, and the head remains, then put the bail of his hand in the depth of the wound, and pull it just to the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts one or two fingers, and pulls strongly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the abscess is narrowed by the hot aposteme that has come to it, then it does not matter to make an effort, but rather to apply moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and let the plasters be applied, and put on a soft, moistening and soothing poultice.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the vein is on its ribcage, and you can put it in place, then apply what we have said for a living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and let no one touch it, if the skin is torn apart in pieces, and nothing will be left of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then apply what we have said regarding hot abscesses that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if a discharge of blood comes, then it should be stopped with a constricting poultice, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had an infant that had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other was dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension, a abscess came to her womb, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to suppurate greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not suture the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly had no bones to point of having bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I searched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman urinated for a long time afterwards, and little by little issued from her body;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter before because of that, when a master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the hammer back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Then comes the shape of the presser, to which one gives the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and it turns to the heads of the two strings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every way, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made from ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the staff should be one finger in width, and the margin of the trees two fingers, and a palm and a half in length;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same staff, which are attached to one and the other, a half palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the hammer to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, to its similarity more subtle and lighter, is made from wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the similarity of the tanneries.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two joints, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see to open the woman's belly with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, the feet hanging and the legs spread, then put the two joints joined together in the belly, and hold the head of the instrument separated between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand with the instrument, as you have done with the tanneries equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the belly, until the ball makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted on top, and are multiplied in their similarities;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the eyes are prepared, it is much more swift the work, and higher for men their ability.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not an excuse.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in the infant, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her expel the mucus, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she spits through that, it's good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take the vessel, and make a poultice or clyster, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the throat, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cane or stick through the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the abscess, and pull tight so that the vapors come out from inside the abscess;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then do the treatment, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary bandage is too tight.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not loose, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in masticatory of nutmeg, and then anoint the nature, and remove the bandage;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, if she takes it and extends it little by little straightly, so that the abscess does not burst from the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but first move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull it;
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and is loosened.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the thigh is tightly closed, we have said the treatment of purification, and of smoking with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that which we have said, beware that you do not falter in the treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, that you bind it to the hip of the woman, then anoint her with a four-part ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the poultice and plaster are applied, and come to a fever;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it suppurates if bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harasses the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If then it is necessary to have fumigations suitable for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	some of the ancients have experienced smoking with crotons and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one treats women for retention of flowers and of the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similar to a chain, and put the thin head in the nature, and the wide feet on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the dyer as long as it is wasted, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but instead the upper part is stopped up with a thin syrup:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary for the nurse to pierce that upper part with her finger, and not to pierce the spatula of the gut, and to warn the child that it does not touch;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the mole a moistening of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, then put or pass a chain of the pelvis, and let the hands be still, and be careful when the infant wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes there comes sudden swelling from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to treat that one suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	it should be treated, as we have said concerning the chain of the pelvis.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the anus are an annoyance, and worse than those that come from the fundament, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that annoyance is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by what comes out or excretion or flatulence when the patient has diarrhea, and by chance in jumping of the blood vessel.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the rod;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they come through to the joint of the thigh, and to the top of the hip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fistula that penetrates to the bottom, and does not penetrate:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your right index finger to the bottom, and apply a subtle needle of copper or iron in the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, then you apply a thread of subtle flax, or a horse hair, until you feel the thread or the hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come through with diarrhea or flatulence or blood, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	let it be that she does not perceive anything;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the passage of the urine, if it affects the urine, and cannot be cured by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived next to the joint of the thigh, then the tender vein comes next to the limb;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain inside, then it is that it comes from the bowel, and no medicine or poultice is of value;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas next to it there is no cure except for work and vanity of foolish surgeons who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not next to it and is not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient puts between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then probe with a tent of scarification, or of pulse if there is torsion, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it within the foundation, then you should put your right index finger, if then you feel that the probe has penetrated;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and is discovered where you feel between your fingers the skin or the flesh, then know that it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if not operated on, then one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can indeed heal some of them well with a poultice, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is made, if it is that one cauterizes subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and heat the poultice thoroughly in the fistula, until it comes from beneath the foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these fatty tissues are burned, which resemble a feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat with moist tents in butter, until that fatty tissue is softened, then treat with a greasy ointment sticking and soldering.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	Unless this is done, nothing else can heal;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it is inserted between, and does not penetrate just to the knuckle which is at the foundation, and between your knuckle and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula in this which shows the covering of the tumor;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and apply a poultice beforehand to the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tendon will be delivered, and will fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then I define those empty and withered members which seem a single finger, and nothing remains of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood comes to you, and cuts between the skin and the vein, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauterizations bring together two bone things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the joining of these withered members, and the stopping of blood and the drying of the moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the moist tendons with butter or broken nuts, until the limbs are supple and free, and put them back in their place in the bow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the dislocated joints with a harsh dry medicine, and these are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from deep within the foundation, and it is separated from the body, then anoint the finger with the foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the web or the siphach or veins, or it is pressed to pierce, if there are not other than the way of relief and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut from the bottom of the wound, or if you can place tents and cure as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deeply, so that you do not cut the tendon which holds the foundation, and come with the evacuations according to the will of the patient;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then cure it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by adventure it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound after it is cut from the bottom of the foundation, or by a tent or other sharp instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then anoint the wound with the plaster that is on the spot, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part against the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes are fistulas in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or touches the bottom of the foundation under the skin, if take a needle pierced at the head in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I push the thread through II, and push the needle with all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it passes in the margin of the bottom within, then pull out the thread from that which has passed through, thus that you push your finger on the bottom;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it several times, until the threads join these parts that are between the two, and stick together;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if the abscess is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to make a cut for the fistula if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinous spatula that one makes for the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and not on the other side, because one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the fundament, like a grain of resin, and some are small and others large, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they are below the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are outside have little moisture, and often a bit of yellowish or greenish discharge, or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them within the fundament, is that you instruct the patient to strain himself by going to the chamber, until the fundament is emptied, and the fissure is apparent;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten it, and hold it with forceps, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ulcers cannot be held by their moisture, then they take to a dressing, or a swab, or a piece of chamol.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with the fingers, then cut them, and dust above some warm powders that are suitable for cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you will cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot be made to issue, then clysterize the patient with a sharp and bitter clyster to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can issue openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient is pressed, and if the thread is cut from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you press them with your nail or with the tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it happens that you must treat the fracture in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread to the other side and make the needle pierce from the other part, and turn the two parts of the thread around the needle, and let it be of the width;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and pull the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to stop the excessive flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the wound a moistened cloth dipped in oil or in cerate, and apply it to the wound, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it be until it adheres, and when they have adhered, then treat with bandages and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Dryness of the dung or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the dung in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not of value.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you stop at the point of a spit or on one nail the flesh of the soles, which does not let it get moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it as long as it is swollen as it is necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be treated, then rub the scratch stronger than before, until it bleeds much, and becomes scarred;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as long as it is wounded.
dou fremit	of a tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Furuncle is a small false appearance in the body, and goes much deep within;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it perforates the flesh, and one feels it like death from a tremor, and it comes into the whole body, and more to the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a vein from a wing of a goose, or a wing of a strong cult, and put that vein on the forehead, so that the circles surround the forehead entirely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand to take the entire vein so that you bind entirely around the forehead, and put it in depth, and scratch the forehead from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a vein of copper or iron in this form, and let it be subtle below and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	nor pierce, for it will hold by itself, and press by itself.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the forehead, as it is described before in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the Clyster.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or gold, or of melted copper or enameled;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes they make these swellings small and large, according to what they are applied to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Thus then one applies it in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the cluster small and large is thus wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and it has a dislocation where the belly should be tied, as you see, and the breast should be pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has on one of the sides two perforations, and in the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let the belly or stomach be filled with medicines of a beast's bladder or of parchment, and let it be pierced all around with many small perforations, and let there be between each perforation one thread of space, then put in these perforations one strong thread of twisted hemp cord, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, then thread it to the instrument in front of a strong string, then give an enema;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or with egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister closes his hands together as long as it is all seen, then removes the clyster, and raises the patient's legs to his shoulders, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as it can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a night nearby, it is more great aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give a clyster for a sickness of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to come out, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the morbid matter is in the foundation, or the abscess, it should be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of a subtle cluster where the skin is tight:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	now we will tell you about the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to the case.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of knife, or of spear or of stick or of shaft, or of similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it happens that the hemorrhage of the cephalic membrane is so if there comes little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the contrary side of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and forbid the patient a fullness of wine and of fat meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, his food should be diminished, and he should not drink wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if abscesses or ulcers come, a cotton cloth moistened with oil or rosé wine soakage, or in styptic vinegar;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound has been touched, then put on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be assembled by stitches, then assemble them by suturing, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, concerning the suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it stinks, and does not hold but for a little, then cauterize it;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then cure the wound with medicine, and restore harsh flesh to the leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as roasted and fried meat, also like birds, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rot on the leather, and it does not adhere to the bone, then scrape off all the rot, and apply force, then cure it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has become arterial in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put in this powder which dries just as the arsenic would have done.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is this:
pren encens une partie;	Take a pinch of incense a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	vital cypress three parts, and powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and extract firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it without unraveling, so it does not become inflamed;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes this ointment of cypress alone, when one does not have incense or blood of dragon, but that the wound has not been treated with arsenic.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has touched the wound, likewise in this case, do not put any of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but rather apply some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until the wound is entirely scabbed;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal other wounds as long as he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the artery of the neck or the vein is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the artery, then there is no other treatment than to leave it alone, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the arteries and makes them retract;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the arteries is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be soothing, as if warm water is poured into sweet oil, and mixed with rose oil, and warm water is poured also into sweet oil, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moistenings are applied.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then pierce above or lower at the flesh;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and with flowing blood comes, then dissect, and ligate, and cauterize, this is the business;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the vein of the throat is cut, or the artery, and the conduits are preserved, through which the food goes, then sew the artery to the rope of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he tightens the bandage, and lets it be for some hours, then he cures the dislocations of the shoulders until they are healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, thus the cartilage;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are fragments of bone, thus the shattered parts you can remove, and that which you cannot remove, leave until the wound suppurates, and is cleansed and freed from the pus;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have spoken of.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become festered, then cure it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a spear or of a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow of a spear or of a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound for signs of what the patient will endure:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it with the blood that does not stay in depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I put on a attracting ointment, and bind it to him twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put in the wound a lot of cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm comes, nor trembling of the heart, and there are no signs of strangulation;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the bones in their proper place, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the thenar of tentions and other treatments, as long as it is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and becomes open, show that it has fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as one ought.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or in the thigh or on the back, then the treatment of that which is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, with stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in a mass of crushed pieces, thus treat the wound, and the torn fibers if they are separated;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not separated, then let the wound rot, to facilitate the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds of other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Drop of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The drops from the rupture of the belly are great and menacing and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the large wound often issues the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the entanglement of the entrails;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more troublesome, and often worse than the small wound that of the large one, because one has to put back in place the intestines with more points, as one puts them back in hot from hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, if they are put back in place with more points, and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because one has to put back the intestine in its place that the other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and the other special stitches are common to the other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all ways they are more suitable with the cuture of the belly, and I will say to each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and a thing of the intestine comes out, and it's difficult to put it back, it is by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is frozen, warm it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	wet a sponge or a cloth in hot water only, or you heat it in hot broth and caper and pepper, and apply it to the intestine as long as the swelling is reduced;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this brings constriction, and it is necessary to loosen in order to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the obstruction departing, anoint the intestine with water or oil and evil humors are cooked, for by this the entrance is alleviated a little of the thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument through which one collects the evacuations;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to move the stone, that we must not cut unless there is great necessity for it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	cut within the body and do not cut through, and see to it the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine is healthy, then put it back in its natural form in its own place, if you have the power to do so, for this is a good cure.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part near the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, place the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then put attention to that which the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and therefore it is necessary to administer what I say for large and minor wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, put what is appropriate for you, then take it between your hands and apply the ointment that touches all the rupture with its hand, and bring together the edges;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound two threads of space, and stick a needle where it has a strong thread tight;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thread, which is underneath the leather, until you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the thread with the four ends assembled;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain from a double thread between the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then leave the thread of the suture, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then thread the second thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to your skill with needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be moderate, between fine and coarse, for fine needles catch all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason it is necessary that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and the skin, so that they do not catch and close the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then catch the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or dressings on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this manner of treatment is more suitable for small wounds, for it is enough to have one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second treatment is common, and it is that you join the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the fascia together with one needle or where there is one strong middle thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these parts all four together, then bring the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a little finger;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitching suits a man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a blow, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it came out of the intestines as thick as two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 23 hours, and the wound was sewn until the 15th day, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I applied to the wound cotton soaked in water twice a day, and I bathed him with warm milk until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of cauterizing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and thrust it into the part until you reach the inner core;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the right heart directly, then leave the head of the suture or cauterizer where you thrust the needle, and make it pierce another part of the inner core until it comes out;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as well as the tailor makes the felt, and that you leave once the seam of one side, and take it from another, until the suture is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of suturing, which the Gauls call their own, is thus: as some do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one edge of the seam to the other edge, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Fix a needle or the point of the mirror at the protruding edge, and make it pierce only the flesh, and leave the two edges of the seam;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part just to the inner edge, between the two edges of the seam;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make it pierce one and the other of the outer part just to the inner edge, in the two other edges of the mirror that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the most common manner of fracture and the most frequent.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says that one must sew up the belly with 2 needles, where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew gloves;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and it is known that when the intestine is in the middle of the belly, then the suturing is more troublesome than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the artery has moved, then put back the intestine, and the gut;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the powder made from charcoal, and if the artery has been moved, then put on some ointment that is at hand, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and they tighten the thread, and sew up the suture, and the bandage.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicines, apply to it, as much as the beginning of the gum of cotton wool, and anoint it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not become putrid in the main members, then it is necessary that you moisten a light leg with oil of tempered heat, or with rose oil, and apply it to the groin, and disolve around the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or ulceration in the belly, and it often happens, then give a clyster of black wine, and also if the ulceration reaches to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the abundance of veins that are in it, and the delicacy of the entire body, and the closeness of its nature to the kidneys.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the intestine heals from the wound, then it is reset back as it was before, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned towards black or dark, then you must lacerate the part that has turned black, so that corrupted blood does not come from it, for there are veins and arteries in it;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until the time to alleviate the extraction when the intestine and the wound close.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the navel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen that a man was pierced through the belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus issued the digestion and the flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put a cure according to what I could, and did not cease to treat subtly until he was healthy, and the wounded places were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him well, I doubted that the patient had a bad thing in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not have a point of pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in a certain manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take the frayed ends of large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the frayed ends have covered the mouth, put it on the lips, so that it constricts its mouth shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then sew the head, and it holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another frayed end on in the same manner as before, until the wound is all taken in;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	This head if it becomes entrenched in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is sewn from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this thread of intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of flax subtly twisted, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and return it into the bowel;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of treatment of wounds is not better than following the path of experience and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal organs, there is no skill or health, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Be aware that every wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is hollow and has a cavity.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is, according to true and nodding observation, a hard and white node, where one does not feel pain, and is as hollow as the bone of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it has a clear and hollow cavity, and other times it is dense;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there is no scar, it is not outside of one of the VIII causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to be known, by the smallness of the flow of blood or of the body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it has a hard crust inside, and on the lips, which does not allow a scar to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the limb is rotten, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is that digestion is slow, and health is slow, and it is weakened by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the symptoms, and the treatments of medicines in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the kidneys, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to certain of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous sanitation, and there is no labor but trouble and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I have spoken of, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to examine it, take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you seek;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of fluff, because the fluff will fold into the twist;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well examine it with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, because the moisture from one opening to another cleans and purifies;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then feel it carefully with your thumb, to see if there is bone or nerve, and if it is deeply seated, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the limb where it is, and if it is loose from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the limbs that I have told you, then cauterize according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty and corrupted flesh that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated straight through, then you should cauterize deeply as much as you can, then put moist tents with sharp medicine, and push them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments on healthy flesh, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healthy by that, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerves are not troubling the main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as long as the corrupted part is entirely cut away, then treat the diseased and painful flesh until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healthy, and the wound remains as before, be aware that you are not successful until the end of the treatment;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it becomes uncovered and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not so, be aware that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to let nature take its course;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with forceps, then extract it with the suitable instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull out all but one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cauterize and reset and heat, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound a warm poultice of rotten material, and let it stay until the limbs are rotted around the bones, and then they will be easier to extract the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, then raise only the corrupted part until the blackness is all bony, then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes just to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it is necessary to cut and cauterize right to the corrupted part, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the materials came to the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, and there was no visible cause for it to burst open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctors in their foolishness made an incision so high that the abscess burst open, and a lot of material flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many perforations came that poured out both bowel and body moisture;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many doctors treated him for two years, and he had no skill in the art of hands, so that I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was flowing out through the perforations from his body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and it had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pushed a probe into one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one vein came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I then hastened, and cut into one of the openings as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went right to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I showed what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to treat the wound with soothing medications for a long time, and could not suture;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and showed it, and then removed it, and prepared to suture the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I did not touch the inside of a palm of the hand, and pulled the thread according to its whole size, then restored it with medications;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and quickly, and there was no need to restart the work because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For by the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely healed, and a hard lump formed on the hand, and it was of good disposition and had no discomfort nor any hindrance in anything, neither in movement nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it is necessary to treat it in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the bandage, and bind it at the head of the bone that is broken, and instruct him to hold it up high;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another bandage on the thigh thicker than the first one, and tie it around the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the skin, so that you draw the corrupted flesh to the bottom, and discover the flesh on the limb where you see the sore, so that the sore does not touch the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a splint or a pad behind the bone to support the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to see and feel the corruption as much as one can, and even another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put a splint behind, and then draw from one part to the other the corrupted place, and let the dressing be as long as the corrupted area, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if there is corruption in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and be the bone or it contains from the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand, or in the knuckle of the foot, it is a very strong thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, as it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve do not cause a contrary condition;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the cutting and the seams for cutting these bones are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their thickness and their thinness, and their largeness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each similar tool of work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and you will know that the work will show you the tool that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the tool that you need according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head is dislocated either by internal cause or by external blow;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they are not beneficial, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes either by death or by wickedness, which is greater, from the defect of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then come those corruptions of member into member, and spread throughout the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to the copper, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as the scorpion of the sea and viper and similar things, if the corrosion is at the head of the pain, if you touch it, and do not give space to come near the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes near the hand, then touch it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, then touch it at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy stronger than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and all this I do when the corrosion reaches the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it reaches the first joint, then touch after the next joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it reaches the foot, then touch the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy for the patient but to die from the thigh wound;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to cut or saw the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one assistant with the lower limb, and another assistant with the upper limb, and you sever the flesh that is between the two limbs at a wide spatula, as long as the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or saw, and put on each part a dressing of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient another lesion and painful abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if a flow of blood comes when you make an incision, then cauterize the flesh immediately, or apply some restraining powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then tie the injured limb with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in his dream:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a blackness that seemed like embers of fire, and this corruption first came into his right foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long time after, the corruption returned to his right hand, and he came to me, and I applied to him things that push back after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroisons;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to amputate the hand, but I refused, because I had hope of pushing back the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and he doubted that if he cut his hand, it would not die, for the virtue of the arm was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired of both, and returned to his land, and ceased to cover his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not seen it happen except when one makes another part, if one is a master of the trade.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in the flesh and remains so long that it makes a large gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then breaks and bursts, and out comes the pus, and remains in the flesh a hole, like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as delicate as a silken cloth, and does not adhere to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such an illness is called " eczema", and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so stretched that it comes right up to the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so that you cut that skin all around, and likewise when it is thin, like a delicate sheet;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have made the skin heal, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a cluster:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the abscesses are large, and the bowel which is in it is of foul odor, then cluster with the medicine of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take arsenic, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put the skin in a vessel on the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take from this according to necessity, and make it into a sharp point and in the middle, and insert the syringe, and hold the perineum;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine sit for 2 hours, then extract it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the chest is cleaned and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes the syringe is made sharp with ashes, when this medicine is not available, and it is that you take ashes of vine shoots, and sharpen them above, then filter them, and inject, until you know that the chest is well cleaned;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the sharp ashes, then inject with a sharp and pointed instrument where it has a bit of melted litharge;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	You anoint with honey and mixed wine, that the honey has properties of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the blood rise;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you have seen that the blood is well purified, then anoint with what makes charcoal appear in it, and that you take a plaster of diafinit, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you anoint with certain medications and with oils, of which I have mentioned the properties or treatments of the oils;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the hole in the breast is small, and the cane of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with a needle, and put in a tent made of Egyptian ointment or royal ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave only as much room as the syringe can enter, and if the hole that the bowel protrudes from is above, then cut below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in the depths, do not let it protrude outward;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the belly downward as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place it is, for when the bowel is deep, do not let it protrude outward and if you cannot cover the belly downward as you wish, arrange it in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowel may run lightly downward, and nothing of the bowel is left behind;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and apply them to a linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the forces of the wound inward with a poultice as large as the first, then apply ointment sufficiently on another cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate it, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is above the hole of the sink, often opens the belly, and knows what comes from the belly, if it is venom or poison or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is in such a manner extended and you see the nature that comes from the hole of the sink, then know that the sins are open, and approach the health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, if change one dressing for another, and renew the application.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the sins throw up undigested belly after many days, know that the sins are not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long tension, do not despair of the health, for the health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose tardiness causes harm to their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if his bowels are not digesting the food that comes from the body after several days, it is a sign that the body is not being evacuated;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if his body is slow to evacuate, and it is delayed, then apply dry medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diafoin ointment, for there is a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diafoin ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then prepare the jam and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same thing makes a cooked honey thick, when diafoin ointment is not available, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then apply the plaster, and spread it over the breast, and sometimes administer to them aristolochia, and roots of lis celeste, which is as effective as flour of vetches and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I mentioned, and use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the sinews;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panaritium is an abscess that grows under the nail of the finger of the hand, or of the foot, or by accident grows in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, then there comes an aposteme of the foot, and running and discharge of pus as long as it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance it discharges entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come corroisons next to the bone, as long as there comes a painful swelling, and the head of the pain is wide, and the color is putrid.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment is of no benefit, then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the excess flesh that remains from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are of great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh, and causes discomfort, and pain, then it is necessary that you put something under the nail that touches the flesh, and pushes it upwards, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to destroy everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out, and apply force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the tooth rotting, cut it out, in the same way as it was said before, then heal the area as long as it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken, and swollen, and it causes great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the fingernail of the thumb sharply crosswise, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the sore thumb of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two bones that grow in the hands of certain men by accident are all cartilaginous, and by accident one has a piece where there is bone, and sometimes one has a nail, and none of them grow at the root of the joint, or their growth is in certain nuts of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those that grow on one knuckle of the finger do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the finger, by accident, do move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one that is cartilaginous is light, in a certain manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those that grow at the root of the joint are grievous to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with a copper instrument.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which grows on the last knuckle of the finger, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh round about to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure it until it be sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pain that comes to both sides together comes from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you treat the swelling, then the doctor must repair it according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two moist towels or cloths soaked in oil or rose water, so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of subtle sponge, as long as the limb is swollen, if it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sudden pain comes to one of his sides with the palm, then treat that swelling if it is necessary.
des vils	of the ulcers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Ulcers are coarse, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities that come to many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the bile, and then the blood of the basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is where they cup, and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you lift the vein, and pull it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Raise the first the thigh of a warm and moist limb very strongly, so that the thick blood becomes subtle, then pull the thigh from the diseased part to the hollow near the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cup the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a large incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the disease can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the doctor instructs him to paint himself with pitch made from black coal.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommends evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevations of it are in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	raise the leg of the patient, if it has a lot of hair, then shave it or wash it, and rub the leg with hot water as long as it becomes red, and the veins become swollen.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, then heat it with fire, and then apply it directly to the vein of the thigh at the head of the knee, or in the area below the knee;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein of each part, as long as it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and then it becomes red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems also like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then cut the infected part, as long as it is elevated from the skin, and then anoint it with a light ointment, then cut it on the other side with three fingers;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scratch the skin on the vein as long as it appears, then lift it with the instrument, as you have done, and anoint it with another ointment, as you have previously done;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another incision, or several if you are skilled in your craft, then lift it, and cut to the finger of the foot, then pull and lift it up to the second incision;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull it from incision to incision, until it is completely evacuated, then cut it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull it and lift it, then put a strong double thread on the needle, and lift and pull it, and push from below the infected part, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and guard that she does not fall, for if she falls, one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it comes to harm the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have drawn it all out, put on the place of the wound a moistened linen cloth in wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the foot is contracted and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must untwist it, but do not cover it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the foot is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it grows in other parts than the legs, and this comes from the decay that rises from under the skin, as it comes from within the body of snakes and worms, growing between the skin and the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation appears in the leg, then the flesh becomes swollen, and the vein starts to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster two and a half inches thick, and the knee, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time it falls off, then rewrap the plaster and the bandage.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely removed;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction on the limb, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because of which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it happens sometimes with this vein when it is treated with 5 fingers of length, or of 10, and a man comes to me, from whom it issues from 10 fingers of length, and when you cut it, then push the vein or the perforation, and pierce it until the bottom, so that everything goes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply to the limb medicines that promote putrefaction for no day, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And often to this vein come pains and aches, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the knee, where many injuries occur, and from which the pains come.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure the ills as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "disease of the maggot", because it often occurs in the intestines, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body rising and descending, and can be felt well by going from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it appears, and falls out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the putridness of certain humors, such as come worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and he doubts his own illness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cure and treat, one cannot be certain that when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then it is necessary that you bind the joint above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut on and treat further, and if the vein is deep in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize with fire, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, hold back from him the eyebrow forcibly, then cut on, and treat further;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary for the patient to undergo treatment of a body with solvent medicines for bad watery tumors, and beware of eating foods that cause purging.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land "vankir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and shortly after, I saw it move up as if a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, like living silver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little after runs throughout the whole body, until it comes to the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she would turn it inside the body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had seen many people who seemed to move their pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and for this reason the aforementioned constriction appeared;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear for this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if you lift up and press down hastily, and then cut into the skin until the aforementioned constriction at the place is forced out;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the limb;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat what causes the bloating, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's head, and similar others.
des saiettes	of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they stick.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is that there are some which have large heads, and small ones, and barbed, and jagged;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two edges, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and the one that sticks in no limb sticks according to two methods:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in a principal member it sticks, such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it happens that you are wary of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when a bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the thread which is on the brain, is when there is scotoma and deafness and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and by chance it is without force to the nostrils, or to the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance hurts the word and the voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and sore of the white moist wound resembling pus, and sore also as raw flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if there is an apparent sign, then take it for the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls or passes, are that it is near the left breast, and feels also as if it was stuck in a hard thing, not seen empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves like the pus, and cuts out black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	those are the signs without doubt that death will soon descend.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow that pierces the arm are that without great pain of spitting sore of the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the lung, then it is detrimental to the little ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and gives great pain and great distress and shortness of breath;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and moves the member of the shoulders entirely.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead remains in the belly, and penetrates to a point of the intestine by the round gut, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels strong pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the arm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happens to me, because of what you do next.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to the man that an arrow shot into his arm at the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I pulled it out, and drew it from another part below the fat of the ear, and he was healthy without any defect.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And drew out from a wound an arrow that had entered into the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was pushed back, and there was no pain except at the tip towards the fundament, and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with all its iron without barbs;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The youth was healthy, and no evil accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beards, and subtleled as much as I could, and it was healthy for the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrow from the man, which had been shot into his belly, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and since it has been thirty days, his condition has not changed;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and pulled it out, and extracted it forcibly, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And I saw the man to whom an arrow had been shot into his back, and the wound was swollen;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural functions were not changed, nor did I find any damage in any of his natural organs.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had been shot into his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remains thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And he pulled an arrow from the hand of the prince the king, which was shot in behind his nape, and was somewhat leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrowhead was entirely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the treatment after it had been shot for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched it with a subtle probe, and did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a piercing and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow, I put on the place a plaster attractive and digestive, because the limbs did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the limb appeared to me to be from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on the wound, and treated the painful injury, and remained with the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his body;
et il le me dist.	and it pulled it out for me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied to the wound caustic corrosive medicine for a long time, until it was covered, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it exceeded the limits within four months, and then cleared up the wound so that I joined the tendons, and the muscles on one side and the other, and it could not protrude;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to refine and to engineer devices, until I took the arrow by the tendons well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as I will describe, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the gristle of the nose cannot restore:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so apply your treatment to what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters understand well only a little of great things, and on what is present and deficient, they find new work, and new instrument, in the discernment of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs or are they fixed unless in two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which shoots forth from the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes now comes out of the flesh.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not heal now, then let it be until the flesh is purulent inside, and the pus is released;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot be released, then let it be for some days, and move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will heal, and if it does not heal, then pierce inside with a very subtle instrument, until the limbs inside are enlarged, and then treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head, and it goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have spoken of appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	then do not treat it at all, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrowhead comes near the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not deeply embedded in the bone, and does not come close to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without a serious accident, then the engine of the traction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very deeply embedded and cannot come out, then administer tractions around it, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it all over the area.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then probe as far as the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a part that it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck between the two parts of the muscle that you pull, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly, so that you do not break the arrow, that you pull it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, then leave it until the surrounding flesh is softened, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you oppose, then remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision near the nerve and the vein, and devise a way that you can pull the arrow without danger, whether it is swollen or tender, or firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in, for that is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears to be something of it, or the skin is swollen in that spot if one sees or feels it obviously.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut then upwards, as far as the clamps can grasp, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it comes out now by itself.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round, as far as it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a remainder of the arrow, push it all the way through;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the bone is fractured, and you want to administer a poultice, if you administer the poultice with a heated instrument, then the point of the arrowhead enters into the flesh of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then apply forcibly, and if the arrow is extracted, then you apply the instrument to the point entering inside, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, if you can, then treat the wound as it is necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow fractures in the foot or the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is near the surface, and you can cut above, then you cut;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs with which one treats the arrowheads are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And they come in many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed instrument is like a bird's feather, for pushing to the point of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and for extracting is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	The veins from which one bleeds are 31, of which there are 16 at the head, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	2 vessels that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the little vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two sinews which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the neck, and lay people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "median", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is on the right side of the body, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is near the ribcage, and it is the one that they bleed from, which visibly appears on the abdomen.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and on the foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is beneath the curvature of the left side of the belly, and the second is the saphena which is at the shin of the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nescia", which is on the shin of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins that are near the ears helps ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the blood, as I tell you, and it is that you should raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then constrict the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	bend then your arm, and where you feel the pulse under your arm, it is a sign of strangulation;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancette, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand at all the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well with two fingers of across, and make blood come out as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then constrict and lift it, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is equivalent to the ancient migraine, and headache, and customary ophthalmia, and at the expense of the sharp tears from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the blood is thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patients stretch their neck, so that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse of the right arm, and then examine the thumb;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then raise the heart on the vein above your right index finger, and push the needle through, and raise the vein above, and cut it, just as you have done with the other veins, and make flow the blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then apply a dressing;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have already spoken of their treatment and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bloodletting from the frontal vein is as valuable as the bloodletting of the head for ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the disease constricts the throat by twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "incisor", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein until it is healed and sometimes close it with a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In no way does it matter if the flames are too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the vein is pierced, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins of the two arms which are in the two shoulders aid the eyes, and the tongue, and the redness, and the hearing in the ear, and the illnesses of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their vein is such that the patients strain their neck twisting some ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the vein be pierced, a little below the length of the flame a little wide, because there is no point to burn.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make an incision of blood, as much as you have in your profession, and then sew on the wound, and sew it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The blood of the vein from which it is born if it is worth to take, and to remove the excess, and for diseases of the face, such as emigraine and erysipelas that come on the face, and mainly when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient squeezes their throat, then squeezes their vein to the left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and puts it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not appear well, and the blood will start to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and make it flow with blood according to its necessity, then let it alone for a night, for it is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the two galls helps with the stretching of the shoulder, and the starting of digestion, and many diseases, and for epilepsy, and for ulcers, and for herpes, and eczema;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the blood are such that the patients strain their neck from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the masters be at the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then cut the vein of the elbow a little widely, then let out some blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then perform the same on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and constrict both veins moderately, so that the patient does not suffocate;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be clean.
de la sainie des leivres	of the bleeding of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins in the lips from above is indicative of disorder in the mouth, and corrosion of the gums, and fissures of the lips, and pain in the teeth and inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each part, and also make it so for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the blood beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The blood of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the blood of the head, and it is for the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks downwards on each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Feel then one and the other, and do not press too deeply, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm that one feels commonly are felt in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by pricking to the whole flame of the fire, or by subtle olive oil as if cutting tendons, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are coarse and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of the fire is very renowned, and is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it has the function to open the full veins that have a lot of visible thick blood, and which contain thick blood and sediment;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the form of the flame of olive oil
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for cauterizing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cauterization of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the cauterizer to cauterize carefully, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not be pricking with the flame, but rather touching gently.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you dislodge it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want any vein of his, or you feel in his arm the vein with the blood
elle apert manifestement;	it appears manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and it cuts into the flesh of the patient, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you examine the arm of the patient, then it is necessary that you stretch the arm, that you touch the arm as long as you know the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the arm from below, and then bend the arm, and cut the vein of the flesh of the patient;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the arm swollen, for it is related to the artery:
eschui la donques.	examine the gift.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it spurt out high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood of the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, and put your finger upon it for a long time, then remove your finger if it is without strain, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Raise the arm, and let it be, and do not move it the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be on a poultice, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if it is without strain, and it is of use to you, and the medicine is not prescribed for you, then cut the artery which is open, because the head of the disease is withdrawn;
et estainche li sans.	and strain the joint.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a splint of fistula, and tie it, and take one of the mallets and bind it well next to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the joint is strained, it is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then heal it, as we have said, with powders that constrict blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stitches are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the position of the joint of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The blood of the vein in the middle helps since it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basile and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon that he be aware of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, and he touches the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the patient's condition becomes grievous, and by chance he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in any man due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you know the sinews of the instrument;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve with your hand.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it is a vein between the two nerves, thus make an incision of its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bloodletting of the head helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed at the olive vein or at the martian vein, for it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In any case, it is necessary to take the lighter limb, and not touch anything unless one fails the first time, and then one resumes;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance one inflames the limbs of certain men, when one fails the first time, but it does not harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to one's thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is not done for the sake of preserving health, but to avoid upcoming illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bloodletting be done on one of the three veins that are on the thigh:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	these are to know, the cephalic, the middle and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, in autumn and in April after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three times a day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but that it should be done when need is, by day or by night, at all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to bleed children up to thirteen years, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than four months up to seven times.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some wish to purge themselves, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the bowels of a light clistere, if they have retained many bad humors, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor does he purge himself well who is too full of meats, nor one who is dropsical, as long as he is in a fever, or having the dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and he warns one to purge himself after a colic passion, and vomiting, and corruption of the stomach, and multiplication of bitter humors in a woman, and from travail, from waking and from fasting, and that which defeats all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then refine the humors, if they are not thick, with meats and with beverages and with medicines, you will have them thin in a short time.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter into the bath, if nothing else helps, to thin out the blood, and to cleanse the vein of the body from the inside, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep away from him the things that cause labor, and pain, and dislocation, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be joyful and happy, and let the healthy area be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull the vein downwards, for when it is too narrow or wide, it cannot be corrected;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the body with the hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then soften the healthy area with a little old oil, then put his right hand on the left vein below the body a little where he wants to treat, so that the vein is not hurt and fails to be cauterized.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that are as tight as cords to the sausage, and if it is of such that are full of gas, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, the wound is too tight, for which it is necessary that the sausages be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then one recommences a little below that place or above the handle, if the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limbs are swollen and the patient is in a hurry, let it be one or two days, and do not tie up the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	for it may happen that abscesses will come out.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter into the bath, then recommend the enema if it pleases them;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not be as much blood as you see, then make that same perforation in the entire flame directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and hold the limb back a little, so that the joints are weakened;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb weakened, do not recommend the enema, and put on a little of oil of rose, for it alleviates the body from blood, and is bad in this limb that which the oil does;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of rose in every enema that you apply to the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing causes a triangular and bulging of the eyes, when one puts it on the back;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtlety cuts the sense and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not properly cleaned except for the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put on the back a damp sponge in water and vinegar for a little while, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the back after some hours a black or green spot, do not touch it;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on something of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastick, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilic vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the compression of the hand, this is that bad swelling.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it happens by chance to cut short the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make a dry plaster for to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes refined;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is weak and weary, and has need of blood extraction, that a larger wound be made to them, and their veins be made larger;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of bleeding is free from corruption of blood and accumulation of dirt, and is better than the bleeding from a deep or large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give them a drink made from the juice of crushed pomegranates;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if they are bilious, give them three or four times blood; and if they are of a cold complexion, mix before the bleeding a drink with syrup made from honey, or with aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it comes to the blood vessel, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he takes broth made from flesh, and sweet-smelling syrup, and uses other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed from his arm, and to bleed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to bleed from his arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, should bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it happens to pull out a large quantity, and to widen the hole so that it reaches the stomach;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you inspect all the conditions of the wound, and put your hand on his buttocks when it bleeds, so that death does not come into the bowel, and this happens many times, when the bleeders are neglectful;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it happens not at all when you see the arm become dislocated, and blood comes out the second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firmly upwards;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, that he should stretch the arm violently, for this would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it be until it bleeds a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you put the point of the flame to the tip of the vein, until the blood that is coagulated in the hole of the wound comes out, and put on a little warm oil, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bloodletting is necessary, perform it on the same arm, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the middle of the arm is bled from the vein of the head because it is connected.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in cold water, until the flesh becomes reddened;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now across, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the incision be wide, and let it be bled close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not flow out, then put the hand back in cold water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is summer, do not put your hand in hot water, for they are more likely to put it in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the blood of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The blood of the little finger of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	bind the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it is a transverse wound, and if you cut through everything from top to bottom, do not cause any grief;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are scattered throughout and detached from the skin, and then put the hand in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and seal it with a bandage immediately, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein in the left hand is useful for the disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I have told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The vein of the spleen is useful for all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the liver, and retention of fluids, and disease of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of the old hams and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its vein is that it makes the disease go from the foot to the cold leg, and rubs on the vein as long as it hurts, and loosens above the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and this vein is at the calf, and above the foot many veins go to the kidneys;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Let the wound be then or more wide, at the shins or at the ankle, where it is most needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat the wound on the foot, beware of the tendons that are disordered, and the sinew that passes across as in cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be anesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot issue out, put the foot in a warm water, and let the vein be well purified.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the bloodletting fails the first time, recommend the second at a little distance, for the limbs are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not be afraid of touching the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the saphena vein of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the thigh, and its bloodletting is good for the pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his blood is such that the patient goes into a bath, and extracts from above the ankle four fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not appear;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it appears, then let the blood flow in all the ways that you can, and by penetrating;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is of more value that you collect it, for the blood is healthy, and it is very useful to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then let blood from the one that appears at the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make the blood flow as much as you want, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and extract;
ele est maintenant sanee.	he is now bled.
des sainies de ventouse	of the bleeding of the intestine
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Intestines are made of horns, or of arteries, or of veins;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventilation is done according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by striking and extracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation which is without striking is according to two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation which is done by striking and by extraction of blood is done in thirteen places of the body, of which one is all in the sum at the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in the two sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventose under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventose of the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventose on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the ventoses in the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the ventoses of the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the veins of the two knees;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the venesection does not draw any blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become weak, as one does from the letting of blood from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor to any hot application, in any disease which comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to perform a bloodletting, or due to habit, we administer it at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who experience excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and such as spit a mouthful of blood, and have their tongue swollen, and vomit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if they are among those who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and measure how it is in the middle of the month, we instruct to take a purging after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saliva of the nose helps with the pain of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this purging is in place of the saliva of the head, and it is not necessary that it be used by one who is of a cold complexion, or who has diarrhea, for this causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason it is not necessary that the old people use it, nor those who have cold illnesses of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often suffers from it becomes oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the bandage a little further down due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The application of the bandage on the neck is in place of the sore head and of the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for the constriction of the chest, and for the fissure of the channel of the forearm, and for the cough, and for the repletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to loosen it a little, because if it holds too tightly, it induces oblivion or vomiting of the stomach and of the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The bandages on the two sides of the neck are useful for the pains of the head, and for eye injuries and migraines, and for strangulation, and for the pain of the roots of the teeth, and are in place of the soreness of the basilic vein.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter to press his hand on the spot, so he does not cut the artery, and does not show signs of evacuation of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The bad smells from the mouth are a sign of illness of the mouth, and of corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is located on the blood vessels of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The bad smells from the shoulders are a sign of an illness that comes from heat and from fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The bad smells from the elbows are as much as from the three veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from these thick veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the bloodletter that he should not make a cut too deep, because the limb is nude of flesh, and has nearby nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The bloodletting that is on the buttocks is suitable for hemorrhoids at the fundament, and for similar illnesses, and it is necessary that the bloodletting be large, and of iron, so that it has the ability to treat well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it is subtle, it will break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The ulcers of the legs appear openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth the old pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and bring back the flesh;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in place of the two hips, and of the two thighs, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring about pale color in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the ulcer is that you apply it first gently, and immediately afterwards, and put it firmly, and rub evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appearing with the redness of blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then do it, and put back the ulcers, and take heed to the disposition of the body, for there are some who have such hot blood, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper;
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtly open the way for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to strike the third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to let out a little blood, it is enough to suffice only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we begin again often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the wound is deep, strike deeply, and stop if it is that the blood flows suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who has narrow pores, that you apply to the limbs ointments which are penetrating and resolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is anointed with oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of seed of gourd.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is treated with oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the discharge is thick and cold, take oil of marshmallow, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who has a tender and large pores skin, it is not suitable to apply oil, but it is suitable to wash after the application of warm rose water, or cold water, or water of mallow, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And the one who has a lot of moisture, rises with ease, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or with water of sewage, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or with other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not suitable to apply a poultice of warm bath before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is not suitable to sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warmed, when he must be poulticed and when he is poulticed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And let those who are bilious be warmed, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce to the vinegar, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and avoid fats, and flesh of mutton, and damp meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine made from old and new, and a little ginger, and a little cinnamon and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the more it is windy, one should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is good to give some men a little nutmeg or musk before and after the movement of wind, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not good for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The bloodletting that is done without pain is that which is done on the vein of the arm, and on the elbow, and in the hollow of the belly, and on the navel and the buttocks and the loins and the thigh, because these members do not suffer from being pricked, and it does not cause more harm than to attract blood from member to member, as we put it on the breasts when the child is suckling;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To treat the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply warm poultices to the stomach and to the navel to soften the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, then remove it by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or evacuate the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and let it be done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these poultices are administered empty in order to suck up the humor;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain or with hot water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with warm water, or with water in which one has cooked herbs suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the poultice administered to the fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has the cost on the inside of the middle of the small perforation, just as if to push a needle, and let it be of silk, sewn in front so that it does not harm the patient when putting on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and it has in the middle a rod of silk or iron across, to put an infusion, and let them be big and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then put this vein on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the candle of wax or the plaster, and put it in the vein across the rod that is in the vein, so that the clarity be at the bottom of the vein that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and let your fingers be on the perforation that we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes in, and remove the ventilation.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the plaster as before, and recommend it often, if you have the profession.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the ventilation then which is administered in disease of pleurisy, to all sharp, has no point of edge nor of perforation, and is not administered unless when it is full of sharp, and is put on the member as soon as.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Salves are not administered unless on members where one cannot put dressings due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the bare flesh of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find sweet, delicate, and clean bandages that are on hand, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a sweet bag, as long as they are familiar with it, and do not have anything in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cured of the vein and the intestine, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and will close, if it is a joint or one can put an intestine, one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the joint from the bottom, and then from the bag, very well, and then press it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the joint is too sore afterwards near the body of the bandages, then wrap it in a linen cloth in a cold bag, and put on, until the bandage is stretched;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if his blood is multiplied, then put on a poultice made with vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until it is dried;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the body a poultice of crushed and ground beans, and let them stay until they adhere to the body, then it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you are not skilled in this profession, then take other bloodlettings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the bloodlettings do not want to take, then rub the body with fresh blood, or you prick it with a needle until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling, then powder on a little of powdered aloe and crushed celery, or cinder, and they will dry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish men scorn this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have they learned from letters;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is estranged in our land, for I have never found any good there;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know not, except that by the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have shortened it at the end, and I have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two previous chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we speak in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and stays on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsions or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to anoint the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, as weakness of the body, or infancy, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the tension is not very warm, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and let the cold humors be treated with cool remedies, and a diet of cold fish and of pork, and do not drink wine, and let the treatment be without greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no suspicion of hot abscess, or of matter accumulation in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to his previous government, he must use it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that cause a large increase, or have viscosity, such as roasted game in a broth, and pork, and thighs, and feet, and stomach of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a warm nourishment will repair the damage and be more beneficial for the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot be well mended or reunited according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but to heal, reset the bone and the large tendons that are separated and joined the limb together, so that it becomes strong as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not at all from his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish him with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the joint, and another while bending, as when the cutting of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a fracture with a wound, and a fracture is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own engine, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory recalls in his body;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by what the joint is twisted, and apparent well by swelling, and sensitive to the pressing of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but he can still have a twist, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move the limb, but apply medicines that come next, and then constrain it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that occurs in a joint, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them in place equally, just as abscesses of the feet come to life;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if a hot abscess comes, then let it be until it is soothed, as long as the abscess remains hot;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it in place with the limb that you can lift easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of this or that where there are fragments;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then hold tight, as it is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone in the foot is fractured, hold it with two parts, whether it's the hand or the foot, or with your hand if it's a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are disjointed, reset by all means the additions in their places in the members as you can, and beware that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to their true forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems that it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if the dressing is done properly, and it is not held too tightly, nor pressed as those do who make their work come from a warm abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, then it is in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of a broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are different in size and in length and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to envelop them with a bandage of soft and subtle linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those which are thick, like the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	if it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the entire limb, and constrain equally from all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then put light splints inside, three or four according to the limb, and constrain the hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and constrain less, than the fracture then loosen a little the fracture;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little at a time, until you press a large part of the limb into place, then take another bandage, and turn it around again above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the fracture, and constrain moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first treatment above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the swollen limbs padding of linen or cloths, as long as it is all even, then tie everything with a bandage above, and then put your instruments in place, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, then apply something that appeases the abscess with heat, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then extract with your instruments, and let it be of a mixture of a large chain reckoned wisely, or of wood from which one makes the splints, or of roots of palm, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the instrument which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold steady on the staves as you did in the first layer, then put a thread of cotton underneath, just like in the first layer on the bruise.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The tighter it is underneath, the less there is;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax or linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it have between each stave less than two fingers of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is distressed by the sides of the staves after tightening on their healthy skin, then put beneath them a piece of flax or a linen plaster, so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the chest is broken, I will tell you about the treatment that follows.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to stretch these tendons on the first day when the limbs are broken.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put these tendons under tension until after 5 days or 7, or more according to the severity of the abscess and the heat that supervenes;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and you will see the method of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take the flour that one holds at Paris from the mill, and mix it with plenty of water, and put this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster for restoring fractures in many situations, and likewise for women and for small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster for restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the sprain:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take barberry and lady's mantle and pennyroyal and aloe and Arabic gum and moguet, a pound of each;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, five pounds;
alechil VIIII З.;	of electampra eight pounds;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make into powder, and mix with oil of wolf's bane;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the temperament of the man is cold, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores the broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster that is good for a sprain:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take moguet and filipendula, a pound;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, eight pounds;
acaice VI З.;	of acacia six pounds;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Take the bolica armenic, and boil it well, and cook with water or oil of buffalo, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to treat the joints and bones separated from their places, and alleviate the overriding pain, and the fracture of the bone, and the breaking:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new linen cloth, and the marrow in a bronze vessel and cooked oil, and put on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly easing the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and earthworm leaves, and boil them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make a plaster for restoring the break of the bone and for calming the swelling of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, of each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and pound, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are swollen, mix it with water of moist coriander or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of plaster stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of violet, and seeds of flax, balm, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and of chamomile, of all one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken member for restoration of force unless made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and says it should be between two, not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems reasonable to apply to the broken limb, for restoration, warm and slightly hot things, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of applying a plaster that is good for an injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take the mugwort and roots of decapitated plants, or feathers of birds, and viminal and equal quantities, and bruise them, and make a plaster with the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then dissolve it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone of their limb affected;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if it does not dissolve by itself in a short time.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or relief, then hasten, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster immediately;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift up the limb, until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry, moistened with water or rose oil, linen cloth, and tie it on with a nut, until you are sure of the aposteme's heat;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be alleviated, then begin with a subtle bandage, and a bit of plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and dress it subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the aposteme is hot and red and painful and swollen, all of these have been alleviated from everything, and you have need of plaster and linen, then begin again, just as you did previously.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said, do not force the dislocation for three or four or five or seven days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes solid and the adjustment of the flesh closes in;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and bind its vein, as I have said previously;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply then a warm and cold application, every time you treat it, and let it be done each third day, and loosen the bandage a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work then cut off the nourishment to the limb, and hasten what foolish doctors do, which twist the limb improperly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is malicious, and such are the works of the fearful, and I do not see anything other than giving pain and doing the work properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures exist, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the bone adjacent to the shoulder which is dislocated from the bone, as if it were crushed or beaten;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason is called this kind of fracture a "crushing".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword strikes the bone from both sides with a blow, and this kind of fracture is called "absolue";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and it is the wound of these two fractures, either great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has a dull blow, or a split, or a blow to the hip, or a fall on the hip, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing wound that approaches just to the membrane which is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is thrown back into the bone as subtle as a goat's hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter in, and the limbs are twisted as the blacksmiths do when they strike on the anvils;
si entre li piere dedens.	if it enters between the teeth.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have a head with moist bones, like a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are separated as from the knees;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the extraction from them, and the inquiry with tongs, and by the decayed flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known by that which when one discovers the bone, and one rubs upon it, if the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and stretching, and palpitations, and sharp fever, and the eyes bulging out and becoming red, and other similar things in various conditions, one cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for health, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navicular bone comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to uncover the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the decayed part of the bone is corrupted, and comes the accident that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or a carbuncle, use what aid is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the carbuncles are cooled, and be assured of the flow of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then it begins within the bone to twist, and it is done according to two manners of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you cut at the narrow tail end in front, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then one beats out the other cutting which is larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of cuttings which are different, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of hardened iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in working lightly, that you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce through it within, in such a way that you administer cuttings with caution, nor too deeply that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the head, and should have at the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it is necessary to have many, so that each one comes into his own place of the spine, so that you have supports throughout all the head;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three types of supports:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one support on the bone, and turn to your fingers as much as you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the support in another place a little afterwards, and thus do all around, then cut with incisions the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted, it is necessary that you reset the fragment that remains of the bone to all other similar instruments, but it is necessary that it be more refined and more subtle than the other surgical tools.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or any chips, then lightly scrape them with one of the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with tents and dressings that we have spoken of.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another manner of surgery is that which the Gauls call, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and it holds very strongly, and this is its nature.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, whether it be broken or bruised, so that when you have discovered that part, then put at the head of this surgical tool, a lancet, of which this is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then make a small hammer blow above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and be careful with the mesh that is underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it adheres to the bone, gently scratch the bone, for one scratches well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate just to the mesh, and the bone is cut just above, and it has small pieces, then it is necessary to render that asperity, and to remove the scales with the subtle rasp that you must have in various quantities, to apply to each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with coarse rasps, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you make adjustments according to their requirement;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and it is a thing that is not denied to one who has placed his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is deep, then it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the size of the wound, and anoint it with rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not hurt the wound, then apply another linen on top, and do not constrict it more than necessary to hold the wound in place;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be thus for one or two days, until the aposteme, that is to say the abscess, is appeased, then undo it, and apply medicines such as roots of lily, and powder of vetches, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer at once medicines without mordification;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and beware that the wound becomes immediately clean, so you do not leave in it any foreign object, nor allow it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and festers, and brings great evil to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts on the wound a caustic thing, it becomes worse by above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed then, that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no fever comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue a drag, and put it on the wound;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then for the treatment of manners of treatments that are suitable, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	It is known that sometimes both parts of the knee are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and this cartilage is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it becomes inflamed or twisted, and then becomes diseased.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your small bandage or plaster of the knee, and put equal to this fracture inside your bandage, and in the pouch by deficiency, until the knee regains its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the knee, and the joint cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a stick, a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, make one part similar to the other, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess of the swollen tumor is alleviated, then bind to the head of the knee with tendons and bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bind one to the other part, where the fracture is;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the openings of the knees.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say to some restorer that one must moisten the tendons in butter, and move each joint.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that it is good, but rather that they should be moistened with a confection of egg whites and powder of mallow;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then let the tendon alone, until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes the swelling bursts out of the abscess, and if the bandage is too tight inside, and it holds the break, and the patient breathes with difficulty;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do that which you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working, then put cotton moistened with rose oil, or in a little hyssop.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made from flour of cypress, and powder of incense, mixed with water, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the nose;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the suitable fragments from that, then sew the gash, and treat things that cause pain, swelling, and inflammation, as with plasters and ointments suitable to that;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it has no thickness of a new wound, thus the treatment of tendons, and put bandages of plaster, until it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured, and there is no open wound, and the breakage is only slight, and it is not broken in two, but rather cracked within, then one must examine it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the breakage is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently push the breakage inward, and hold the other side with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movements of the teeth are disturbed, or a rupture occurs, then hold them back with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the bruised jaw a kerchief, and put on the double cloak.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put on the cloak a large and well-made star or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it around the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the alignment is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then reset to its proper place what has changed;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster on it, made from the powder of a mill with an abundance of egg white or flour of plant, after you have applied the kerchief;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on a light plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healed;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses come, then apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if it has a fracture and wound together, reset the naked piece of bone in its place;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of the bone as extractions provoke convulsions to that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a flame according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have cut all these pieces of bone, and none remain, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on it some plasters suitable to that, to draw out the pus, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the fracture
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture breaks several times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	When it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are fragments, and it is more difficult to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is such that when the break is without wound, you should have two attendants, so that one holds the injured area where the force of the break is;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the break in its place with your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor crookedness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have the need to stretch further, then put between the shoulder and the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stretch and lift the force, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in its place, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the ditch, because it comes from deep within, then it is necessary that the patient put his hand under his armpit, and place the middle of the shoulder on the elbow, and push the lower end of the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then take the breakage with your fingers, and if you pull it true to its debris, then it is necessary that you split on;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut it with one of the incisions that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, to guard the spleen:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it seems a spoon, and is not too heavy, and should be as large as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two parts, as you see, and one is larger, and the other is narrower, just like the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the shape is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, then moisten the dressing with oil, rose water and vinegar, and apply.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you apply to the bone a plaster made from powdered millstone and egg white, and apply light bandages, and put a sponge soaked in vinegar under the bandage, if you have the skill;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double cloth on the swelling, and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the end of the bandage is hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and undo the healthy shoulder, and undo the diseased shoulder.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then rewind it every day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the joint upwards.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If the fracture of the collarbone is reduced by the reduction of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then put on the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is most often restored in twenty-eight days, and in less than eight weeks.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates when it is not in its middle, and it does not get better unless by touching;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the bandage conforms to the shape of the fracture, and you rearrange it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the limb powder of millstone with a little water, and light dressings, and put over it a double cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on a broad and subtle plaster, a little broader than the shoulder, and if the plaster is displaced from any part of the shoulder, fill in that place with cotton pads or linen strips, so that the plaster adheres evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it all with a large bandage firmly, so that the plaster does not move from its place, and examine the patient each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it becomes loose, bind it, and put the plaster back in its place, and let the patient lie on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is accomplished, then unbind it, and be careful, for it is not the bone that moves lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone projects forward, and presses against the heart, then make an incision, and extract it, and do what we have said concerning the treatment of abscesses with hot applications.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often at the toe.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the toe, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and coughing, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the bowels in the broken bone, and loses his sense completely.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient puts his back on the ground, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and joins the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and subtly makes an effort to put everything in its proper place, as much as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put on plasters and bandages made with a subtle paste of salt, or other light plaster, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it on the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the linen round to the back, and hold it tight, and look at the book every hour, and if it becomes dislocated, then hold it steady;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to loosen, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and loosen it, and rub the plaster, and address what has come from various methods of treatments;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the plaster, and hold it steady until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	It is known that the fracture of the ribs does not come from a large blow to the back, and to the inner head, and does not occur except by reason that they are fragile;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and let the pain be well for two days.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and extract a splinter, if you are skilled in this profession.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as from a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits great quantities of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is one of those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which inflate the stomach, in order to expel the breakage downward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if it is not come from bad blood.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then bleed it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that one puts cupping glasses on the body, to suck out the humor, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	In every way, doubt exists that the veins do not attract the excesses of the body due to the lack of strength.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the body with a warm woolen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the flow of liquid around, then be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of diet and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone that breaks the fabric, and doubt exists for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put instruments in place to protect the lung;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, and gently draw it back, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a postulated tumor comes, then put on it a moistened cloth with oil or rosewater, and put it on the affected area;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat meanwhile the area of what is necessary for the tumor, and let the dressing be put on the affected place where it should be, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bones of the neck, and it happens that it breaks;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then take warning if you see their hands made soft and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when one presses and touches, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease will be cured, if one applies a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take care to see if the feet are weak, and if the intestines are those that are in the hands, and on the back there is swelling and vomiting without desire.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has it above their stomach, then there is vomiting without desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is swollen above his back and he wants to sit, then he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that they are mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	then do not labor in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is more gentle.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you apply if it has a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of muffled wool, as long as it is appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on one of the soothing and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone dislocates, then it is necessary to put a strap around the chest;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and reduce the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with an ointment of gum, until it is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the elbow", you will put your fist into the palm of your left hand, and place it even with the other hand at your shoulder, then apply the plaster and the stake above, if you have a profession;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then hold it straight, and if there is a bone out of place, put it back, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It happens that the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it happens, it does not happen with a little manipulation at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and it becomes too long, and declines to the part below, and comes to the patient pain in the leg, and a sharp point, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you put your hand on top, as long as you are above the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and feel what the breakage and its shape are;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the breakage is at the head solely, then put equal to that breakage, as long as it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is from the length, or it declines inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, put on a plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of leather, and hold the break, so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and anoint the limb below the ribs, until the ligament is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient that they should sleep on their sound side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a warm abscess comes, do not touch it, until the warm abscess is appeased, and put on what we have previously mentioned;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it requires, if there is no other bad accident;
et c’est li maniere.	and it is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulders are that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, thus one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a wooden stick of moderate thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two sticks to the two sides, and bind them high up, and sit the patient on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then put the stick with the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, and have in the middle a curve of stick, then tie on some heavy thing where the minister's hand stretches downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the minister's hands together equal to the break, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties his hand to his neck, then instructs the servants that one of them touches what is on the fracture with his hands, and the others touch below everything to the ligament, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then hold the ligament below the fracture, and on the fracture, and stretch each of the servants to his own part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one ligament below the armpit, and the other towards the hollow, below the fracture;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the fracture is towards the hollow, then it is necessary to put the ligament lightly, without strain, until the fracture is even on the limb, and on the hollow;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then put even the fracture, if it is necessary, and hold back, if abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses do come, do not hold back until seven days, and put on a moist plaster with oil of rose, until the abscess is appeased;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then hold back, and the manner of holding back is that you put a plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put on a bandage, and hold to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in place of balance, if nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers' width, and let each splint be so large that it goes around the fracture three fingers from each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then strain on the stiles, thus as I have said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, stronger and less in aligning.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the alignment of the stiles, and the straining, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken limb, and you suspect the hot abscess, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then examine each for three days the ligament, that neither swelling nor inflammation comes to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it adheres, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident occurs, then do not force the dislocation further after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and have their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a cushion under the shoulder joint evenly, and watch each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, nor the tendons become soft;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is treated with the virtue of medicine, and the food is given which we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food should be at first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it starts to take hold, then it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken in 40 days of the whole;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines to the joints for the body to be treated.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the fracture is ugly and swollen, then it stays dislocated 40 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breakage of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the " radius" and the "ulna", one of which is small, and it is the one that connects to the forearm;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is outward, towards the little elbow;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance breaking the large radius alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small radius bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large one is broken, then the healing is difficult, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small radius bone alone that is broken, then it is necessary to stretch it gently, and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large radius bone, then it is necessary to pull it more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it onto the cushion, and stretch the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and let the little fingers be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross themselves on their own body, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the patient suffers no labor;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's arms to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and one of the other ministers to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mire equal, according to its natural form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is none displaced that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a poultice on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if it breaks with a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	If you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, apply a plaster made from oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the plaster subtly on top, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and put on a plaster made from powdered millet with some egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger, and a little larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have six splints or arms in several positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	let the fracture be in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and less tightly when approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the scar tissues that are on the bruised area be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And bind the member and the vein after a few hours.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you rub the member with warm water, until that itching is appeased;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be restrained from resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the tightening, and if the veins are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, apply a remedy.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the nourishments cannot come to the member, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few hours, until the nourishment runs, and then tighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie them for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or put it thus: then he puts his hands at his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and of degeneration, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are few fractures, and it does not come more than a flow of blood many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or pierced, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of him evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the mangled bones, and puts the nerves in their place, as long as they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and applies a plaster and a poultice, if an abscess does not come, then he puts in a probe according to the quantity of the humor;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and let it be enveloped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is on the inner side of the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the probe be of wood as soft as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the fingers, it is necessary that you put a probe on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is closed and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the cloth between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if a fracture comes to one of the two bones, it is the pulse, set it even, as it is necessary;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and strain with the sole of the foot, and if you see that a small straight stick is put in place to lift the fracture, and does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in one of the other bones, such as in the elbow or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy bone that is nearby;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them together in a bandage, which is of use, or you put on a stick, like a poultice;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of hot abscesses, and heal what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and one can see it well when it turns to the front and back;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is thus on one side of the fracture, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient puts his hands on his face, then each assistant extends his hand to his side equally;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then let one of the assistants be at the groin, and the other assistant below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the assistant be at the knee, and let the extension be below;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the doctor's bones evenly by his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, then let it cool down, then return to your work and to its treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The ligature is made in a similar way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a bandage doubled two or three times, and in addition the superfluous, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the hip, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then put on the fracture these, and put a steel rod against the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal pressure, then begin to tie firmly two or three turns around the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and the more you go up from the fracture, the less it is tightened;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then understand the two heads of the thread that you have passed between the thigh and the hip, and in place III these which are dislocated, then return to the dislocation at the head of the thread, until you come down to the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it steady, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing comes to it.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, then loosen it, and treat what comes from it, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if it has pieces of bone that are pricked, then reset them in their place, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then reset by cutting the place, and pulling strongly;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip is broken thus when one puts these, as in the shoulder or the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	In every way, during the restoration, do not conceal from the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And be aware that the hip is restored in the joint, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complications.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the cavity of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Be aware that in the hollow of the knee there is little breaking, but it often swells.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no more than a fissure, or a perforation, and has a wound, and without a wound, and that feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when one puts back what is broken in its place, as long as it is assembled with what can be put together;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and put on a round splint, if you are skilled in it, and hold it as is necessary, then consider all the treatments that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses, heat, and similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Put to each accident what is suitable for it, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Be aware that in the leg there are II bones, one of which is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes crooked on every side.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, it becomes deformed at the front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it affects the foot;
et torne desoz.	and becomes misshapen.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then we apply extension, and put it in place, and lay the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but however, it is necessary to break it if the wound is bad, and it has many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and adjust according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of cloth that press the thigh on one side and the other, and are as long as the thigh from the knee to the hip;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap two layers one over the other above and below, and tie it in the middle, and with this binding the thigh will not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and let no one administer a bandage as long as the thigh, made of cloth, and put it on the thigh to prevent movement, and properly apply it in the fracture or where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you treat him until he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot come sometimes fractures and to the two knees, and it does not happen that they are broken in many different ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then have the patient put their foot on the ground, as if they were going to fly, and then put your foot on top of theirs, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put a plaster and bandages on, and put two small towels under the belly of the foot, then hold the foot firmly in place, then that you have wrapped the dressings around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the linen bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken, or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are some of the fingers broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put beneath the foot that table that I spoke of, and hold it firmly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table firmly beneath the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be standing on the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone in the nature of the woman is fractured, if it is made to swell, then it is inclined to the back part, and held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the bowl with the nature of the patient's poultice, and in it put as much as my fist;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then undress the woman, and lift the back a little by little, and then press the poultice, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the fist;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the poultice, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or within;
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If it will restore the fracture, and you see, take a bladder of barley, and tie a thread to the perforation, and put all the bladder in the nostril.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the thread strongly, until the bladder is inflated from within:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the nostril will return the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and let it be like that for some hours, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone that gives the shoulder its shape in a man or woman is fractured, restore it in this way as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts their study and effort into it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies in several dispositions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Hear the wounds.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	On the rod, when it is broken, take a handful of ivy and bind the rod;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap tape around, and let it be for three days or four days, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of a fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings that we have spoken of bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then anoint with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if apostems or abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if apostems or abscesses do come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the apostems are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would cause a bad accident to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the heart without covering, then you must put it in place lightly with your hands, for a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not prepared to put it in your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 fingers in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary for the master to take 3 or 4, according to what he needs for each treatment of a fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head is placed on the top of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and strike it once, as long as it regrows, and let one be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the bandages cannot hold the bone well, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, so that the bandage has possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an instrument suitable for that, either an incision or a saw, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what remains in the bone of splinters and small shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Make so that it stays in its place, then moisten the dressing with black styptic wine, and properly if it is in a splint.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else where it has oil, so that it does not cause suppuration and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the dressing;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times foolish physicians have done this, and have caused death or corruption to come upon the patient;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the dressing be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an evil accident will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the body, then it is not necessary to apply these;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, on the body of the dressings, a piece of cloth, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days a swelling around the wound, remove what you had applied on top of everything, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is swollen and sore.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the swelling falls away gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but instead discharges pus, with small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all those loose pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears on the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in its chapter previously.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and it opens onto the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it immediately, because many times death comes, but let it be until it purifies;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance it will close after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound, if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come upon the abscess
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times they come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance it cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then that the nose is not cold:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and other similar things, then that you prepare one of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with a bath of warm water or with vinegar;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on a nut in a pestle, and constrain it well, and do not dislodge it with the hand for a long time;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislodge it, and start again another one, until the swelling of the knot is reduced;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you constrain on a well-made piece of splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of splints is that they reduce all the swellings above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be cut, then they cut above it, and make the excess flesh apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you raise it with a razor, until it is reduced, and the treatment until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and it remains after the member is weak and subtle, then it happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	Because one of them is for this reason tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because it had too many ties, and the nourishments could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or because of a multitude of irritations;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, not in their proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body tender, until the blood is multiplied in it;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the irritation of the skin is often soothed, until the nourishment flows to the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb twists after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limbs are twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not retain its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if you do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are blamed, and great evils come from them, and death often results;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the nodules and the hardness are recent, then it is necessary that they be treated with warm water, or that softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of violets, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a softening plaster, such as well-made diacalons, and take the muscle of violet, and mix it with fat of goose or oil of cypress, and apply the plaster;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	You take fat figs, and you crush them with a little fenugreek, and similar medicines that ease the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the node is soothed by continuously and lengthily rubbing it with a moist hand.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the movement be eased on the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuosity is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and needs to be worked with iron, then it must be bored into just to the bone, and subtly and lightly incised;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put caution and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begin the books of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is necessary now to bring back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one is late, the limbs become inflamed, and by chance, if it resets by itself to the limb;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is not suitable to move it to the hole where it is inflamed:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it causes spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in any case, when this happens, if you make the patient sane, then leave him, until the abscesses or ulcers are appeased;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the member from the cold and oily water, then reset it gently, and treat each member as its cure will come into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens that the jawbones are dislocated and loose, and the dislocation of both is in two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are a little loosened from their places, and made a little soft;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the pis, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and envelops the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through many different positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the minister guides the head of the patient, and puts his fingers in the pouch of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on the lower part;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers of the hands are held apart, in order to set it straight;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And look at the step that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reset is difficult, likewise if it is the two jaws together, apply warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	nor do we speak of resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then put on dressings moistened with a mixture made of oil, honey, and wax, and bind them lightly with soft bandages;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be placed between two pillows, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor exert themselves to chew, but take light food, until the pains are diminished, and the jaws are numb;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their proper position, then come fever and accustomed sweats, and by chance a discharge of stomach, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a prediction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times he whom it has befallen dies in eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fracture
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fracture cannot dissolve the bone within the continuity of the body and the fat, and is dissolved sometimes in the intestine, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient puts his arm under his back, and stretches out his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the shoulder forcefully with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and bind it tight, and hold in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the part that is turned towards the hip cannot become dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not, and if it becomes dislocated again, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the plaster and bind it tight, and hold in place, and instruct the patient to rest as long as he is healthy;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and similarly the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is when it becomes dislocated at the lower part of the joint;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second one is at the part of the foot;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and does not dislocate within for the kidneys;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially to those who have little flesh, for to these the joint slips out quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have enough flesh, it slips with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance there is to some men a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is swollen from a hot abscess, and it is thought that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary then that you test it, until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation when it is downwards towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the bone touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an elbow;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his shoulders, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is recent, or if the patient himself is not malformed.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the patient's hand up high, then put their fingers below the bone, and lift the joint forcefully up to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it upwards, then puts it back in place;
si venra hastanment.	if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in lesser hours afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and let the enema be made softening and soothing, such as a decoction of liquorice and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be rubbed on their back, and put under the armpit a piece of linen cloth equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the piece of cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another attendant holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns now to its proper place, and you will see if it is reset in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you make someone who is bigger than the patient be present at home;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and let it be straight towards the side of the sick person, and put the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then hang with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And one resets it in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that you stick a stick into the ground, of which the head is as thick as the wrist, and is neither too big nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then let it be placed under the patient, but so that he has his shoulders draped up, and the patient is standing from the length of the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side of the shoulder, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take the size of 4 fingers in width and 3 fingers in length, which has its head bent to enter into the hollow of the armpit, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie around the head of the fist a soft cloth, so that the fist does not harm the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend his arm on the fist of the long one, and tie the shoulder to the fist, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a stick of a chair of the width, and let the hands be extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint returns to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, then you must put under the shoulder a layer of wool equal, then put the plaster prepared with powder of millstone, and incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder firmly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and hold the hand to his neck, and let the other hand remain in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he moves little, so that the limbs are comforted, for the blood will be more stable;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is hardened and does not become softened, then it will be healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three places, as it is stated beforehand in this chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all that, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be firmly fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is of the chest and the shoulders, or back, if it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another ointment;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cures until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the thigh
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated at the points, and at the points it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated on all sides, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back in place, for one sees it well and feels it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick joint with the sound one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is injured, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses in the vicinity heal, for if the abscesses in the vicinity came, it would be grievous to reset;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be reset completely, likewise when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is thus, when it is such that one can restore it, that you extend his hand with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms should be expanded, and the hands placed according to the shape of the thorax, inward and outward, and the joint bent towards his chest together, or at the root of his palm, until it regains its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand onto his hand, and strikes from the root of the palm the joint that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move during extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, after you have enveloped it with a double layer of cloth, long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the doctor anoints the joint with oil to soften the joint, then wraps the joint firmly, until it regains strength;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, then put on a dry plaster with wool and bind firmly, and tie the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some hours, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie the bandage, and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not bind well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some hours, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels grittiness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it and rub thoroughly, and press until it is soothed;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	You put on the joint a poultice of fatty wool, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the poultice on again, and then enter into a bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times, until it is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see fit, put on a bandage of warm moist cloth with butter, and bind it on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its proper place.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its displacement is slight, more than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not weakened, or that an abscess does not form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedy is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the healthy hand, and look at the hand evenly, so that it puts its palm on the surface of the joint, and bends it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	In any case, it is necessary that you check if it is in its proper place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the sick hand's back on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the sick back of the hand on the table, and look to put the hand on the same surface of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain the bandages tightly around abscesses and ulcers, and leave them thus without removing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some hours, the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does not help the patient much unless the swelling goes down, and he cannot grasp anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy besides cauterizing the case, and by chance there is nothing else of value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and let it be for 5 hours, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, apply warm water, and rub it until it is sound.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the joint of the hand is dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then stretch the joint and push the dislocation to your pouches as far as it will go, then hold the head of the joint, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be two hours, and then put it even with that hour;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and anoint the joint, as we have said, and the dislocation of the joint, and make it move, and relieve the joint;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is straight, and also do this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do this, when it is dislocated in another area.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Drop the dislocation of the shoulder bone from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder bone of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the symptoms are that the evacuations come out with voluntary force, cannot be held, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shoulder moves to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which moves in the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment is that you should rewind where the gilbositez comes from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no point of cure or healing of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from a fall or from blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures say with grand words, where there is not much profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes to the chest before, neither engineer nor wise man;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also the one that comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure the ones outside of the one that properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have their spine straightened, so they do not bend;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix one claw at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string around the shoulders of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two men hold the strings, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two claws;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well strengthened, the tendons as we have said, and the muscles put their palms on the spine strongly, until it regains strength.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not regain strength through this treatment, take a table three handbreadths long, and shave the area around the spine, and let the patient be in a comfortable position, and put the end of the table under the spine, then place the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the surgeon's feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it regains its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see that it is dislocated, make it right for the one who turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix two tendons at the head of the patient's arm from above, and two others at the feet, and have between each tendon, above and below, a palm's length of space;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and it has in each season a pierced or a turned horn, or the horn is firmly fixed in the ground, so that it does not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between two seasons it has a turning horn, because of which the horns turn, and it has in two turns two small seasons of a palm's length, to turn the horn;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the ligament that is between the bones at the joint towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other joint, and each of the ministers turns its turn to all the ligament, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is straight, then put on a plaster made with vinegar and egg, and then the poultices, and then the stake of a tablet three fingers in length, which should cover the joint of the gibbosity and the part of the spine, then bind with a ligament, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment, until they are healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if anything happens at the end of the health, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we mentioned earlier;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes we administer a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spinal column of the back, and we think that it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it's the bone that breaks, for which one should not have a false assumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance or accident death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocation of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out in dislocations, nor do they come out like the other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	downward and upward, and forward and backward;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and thicker behind than in front.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick thigh with the sound one, it is longer, and opens the patient's knee more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the ground;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the place that is next to the hot abscess becomes inflamed, because the head of the thigh-bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who has a defect in the hip is that these accidents are opposite to those in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has a problem in the front are that their thigh is out of alignment according to the condition;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	In every way, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one tries to make it move, it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and the groin becomes inflamed, and when one walks, it passes onto the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has a dislocation in the back are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is out of place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reminder of this type of dislocation is that you should consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, if there is no suitable cure;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not necessary that he has a fracture.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four manners of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and one other minister extends his hand from above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then tightens with a soft thread on the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head of the thread;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has recurred, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then it is necessary to apply treatment to its similarity.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the buttocks, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the limb which is under the hip, then stretch the thread upwards towards the hip, and towards the strength;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another minister with his arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip of the patient, and stretch it in the opposite direction firmly:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot fasten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage under the two heels, and under the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it hang from the head of a pole, and let it be two arms length above the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who strongly embraces the hip, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the thigh, instruct the patient thus, as we have said regarding one who has a fracture, and stretch the tendon above the sick thigh properly, and above the foot also;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two splints, one at the head and the other at the feet, then fix the splint between the thighs to the patient in the middle of the form;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have moist cloths applied around it, so that they do not touch the patient, then extend each hand towards him, and let the physicians put their hands equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on a wooden table, and press thus as we have said regarding the fracture, and instruct the patient to rest on the injured side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick thigh immediately, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And put his right hand on the patient's shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the thigh, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward, nor lift from the ground, but rather that it should be as if the hip was dislocated upward, as we have said concerning lying on the two hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on its face, and the limb stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint with the fist;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be at an end when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then join the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest three or four days, then undo it, and put the plaster on again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, then hold them back, as before, and let them be for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then unbind it, and make it walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	namely, inward, outward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and not dislocated at all to the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take your knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee to form;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it has well its leg at his thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make adhere the leg to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then undo it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not exert the patient to get up, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, administer strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed;
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes numb, and sometimes completely dislocated, and within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it is pulled forward to the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The relocation is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it has only slightly slipped.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated to a great extent, then you must have the patient sit straight, and pull the bone forcibly back by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently bend the foot upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, bending and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns to its place, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, then resume the treatment, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return by itself, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix the ankle firmly to the ground between their legs, and tie the blankets around, so that the patient does not move;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then let the servants support the crotch, and another servant stretches the foot to his hands or to the knee, so that he lies on the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each servant holds equally, and the poles are always between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they stretch it;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the mire equally to the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, put the plaster and stop up above, and tighten firmly, and tie the foot to the thigh, and beware of the nerves that are behind the knee, so that the ligaments are not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let it be for two days or three, and if the ligaments become soft, then tighten;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and have the patient apply it for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes beyond this limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a posthernia or a boil comes, then you must treat it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	of the back
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the back is dislocated, then it is necessary to extend it gently without effort, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the vertebrae of the back or foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table with their back straight, and put your foot on what separates these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it snaps back into place;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and there is no separation, then put under the sole of the foot a board between two sticks, then bind firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and have it rest, as long as it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply at the beginning of things that bring about a hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset now the limb in its place, so that the hot abscesses may come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limbs are in place, then administer things that bring about hot abscesses, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dry dressings;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and with the dislocation of a fracture, and bones are out of joint, if they are broken, and do what we have said for simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and of your body.
